ould consider the linguistic and cultural context in
which the individual is living, as well as his or her educational and learning history in the
original culture and language.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Specific learning disorder is more common in males than in females (ratios range from
about 2:1 to 3:1) and cannot be attributed to factors such as ascertainment bias, definitional
or measurement variation, language, race, or socioeconomic status.
Functional Consequences of
Specific Learning Disorder
Specific learning disorder can have negative functional consequences across the lifespan,
including lower academic attainment, higher rates of high school dropout, lower rates of
postsecondary education, high levels of psychological distress and poorer overall mental
health, higher rates of unemployment and under-employment, and lower incomes. School
dropout and co-occurring depressive symptoms increase the risk for poor mental health
outcomes, including suicidality, whereas high levels of social or emotional support predict
better mental health outcomes.
Differential Diagnosis
Normal variations in academic attainment. Specific learning disorder is distinguished
from normal variations in academic attainment due to external factors (e.g., lack of edu-
cational opportunity, consistently poor instruction, learning in a second language), be-
cause the learning difficulties persist in the presence of adequate educational opportunity
and exposure to the same instruction as the peer group, and competency in the language of
instruction, even when it is different from one’s primary spoken language.
Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder). Specific learning disorder
differs from general learning difficulties associated with intellectual disability, because the
learning difficulties occur in the presence of normal levels of intellectual functioning (i.e.,
IQ score of at least 70 ± 5). If intellectual disability is present, specific learning disorder can
be diagnosed only when the learning difficulties are in excess of those usually associated
with the intellectual disability.
Learning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders. Specific learning dis-
order is distinguished from learning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders
(e.g., pediatric stroke, traumatic brain injury, hearing impairment, vision impairment), be-
cause in these cases there are abnormal findings on neurological examination.
Neurocognitive disorders. Specific learning disorder is distinguished from learning
problems associated with neurodegenerative cognitive disorders, because in specific
learning disorder the clinical expression of specific learning difficulties occurs during the
developmental period, and the difficulties do not manifest as a marked decline from a for-
mer state.
74 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Specific learning disorder is distinguished from
the poor academic performance associated with ADHD, because in the latter condition the
problems may not necessarily reflect specific difficulties in learning academic skills but
rather may reflect difficulties in performing those skills. However, the co-occurrence of
specific learning disorder and ADHD is more frequent than expected by chance. If criteria
for both disorders are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Psychotic disorders. Specific learning disorder is distinguished from the academic and
cognitive-processing difficulties associated with schizophrenia or psychosis, because with
these disorders there is a decline (often rapid) in these functional domains.
Comorbidity
Specific learning disorder commonly co-occurs with neurodevelopmental (e.g., ADHD,
communication disorders, developmental coordination disorder, autistic spectrum disor-
der) or other mental disorders (e.g., anxiety disorders, depressive and bipolar disorders).
These comorbidities do not necessarily exclude the diagnosis specific learning disorder
but may make testing and differential diagnosis more difficult, because each of the co-
occurring disorders independently interferes with the execution of activities of daily liv-
ing, including learning. Thus, clinical judgment is required to attribute such impairment to
learning difficulties. If there is an indication that another diagnosis could account for the
difficulties learning keystone academic skills described in Criterion A, specific learning
disorder should not be diagnosed.
Motor Disorders
Developmental Coordination Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 315.4 (F82)
A. The acquisition and execution of coordinated motor skills is substantially below that ex-
pected given the individual’s chronological age and opportunity for skill learning and
use. Difficulties are manifested as clumsiness (e.g., dropping or bumping into objects)
as well as slowness and inaccuracy of performance of motor skills (e.g., catching an
object, using scissors or cutlery, handwriting, riding a bike, or participating in sports).
B. The motor skills deficit in Criterion A significantly and persistently interferes with activ-
ities of daily living appropriate to chronological age (e.g., self-care and self-mainte-
nance) and impacts academic/school productivity, prevocational and vocational
activities, leisure, and play.
C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D. The motor skills deficits are not better explained by intellectual disability (intellectual devel-
opmental disorder) or visual impairment and are not attributable to a neurological condi-
tion affecting movement (e.g., cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, degenerative disorder).
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of developmental coordination disorder is made by a clinical synthesis of the
history (developmental and medical), physical examination, school or workplace report, and
individual assessment using psychometrically sound and culturally appropriate standardized
tests. The manifestation of impaired skills requiring motor coordination (Criterion A) varies
Developmental Coordination Disorder 75
with age. Young children may be delayed in achieving motor milestones (i.e., sitting, crawling,
walking), although many achieve typical motor milestones. They also may be delayed in de-
veloping skills such as negotiating stairs, pedaling, buttoning shirts, completing puzzles, and
using zippers. Even when the skill is achieved, movement execution may appear awkward,
slow, or less precise than that of peers. Older children and adults may display slow speed or in-
accuracy with motor aspects of activities such as assembling puzzles, building models, playing
ball games (especially in teams), handwriting, typing, driving, or carrying out self-care skills.
Developmental coordination disorder is diagnosed only if the impairment in motor
skills significantly interferes with the performance of, or participation in, daily activities in
family, social, school, or community life (Criterion B). Examples of such activities include
getting dressed, eating meals with age-appropriate utensils and without mess, engaging
in physical games with others, using specific tools in class such as rulers and scissors, and
participating in team exercise activities at school. Not only is ability to perform these ac-
tions impaired, but also marked slowness in execution is common. Handwriting compe-
tence is frequently affected, consequently affecting legibility and/or speed of written output
and affecting academic achievement (the impact is distinguished from specific learning
difficulty by the emphasis on the motoric component of written output skills). In adults,
everyday skills in education and work, especially those in which speed and accuracy are
required, are affected by coordination problems.
Criterion C states that the onset of symptoms of developmental coordination disorder
must be in the early developmental period. However, developmental coordination disorder is
typically not diagnosed before age 5 years because there is considerable variation in the age at
acquisition of many motor skills or a lack of stability of measurement in early childhood (e.g.,
some children catch up) or because other causes of motor delay may not have fully manifested.
Criterion D specifies that the diagnosis of developmental coordination disorder is
made if the coordination difficulties are not better explained by visual impairment or at-
tributable to a neurological condition. Thus, visual function examination and neurological
examination must be included in the diagnostic evaluation. If intellectual disability (intel-
lectual developmental disorder) is present, the motor difficulties are in excess of those ex-
pected for the mental age; however, no IQ cut-off or discrepancy criterion is specified.
Developmental coordination disorder does not have discrete subtypes; however, indi-
viduals may be impaired predominantly in gross motor skills or in fine motor skills, in-
cluding handwriting skills.
Other terms used to describe developmental coordination disorder include childhood
dyspraxia, specific developmental disorder of motor function, and clumsy child syndrome.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Some children with developmental coordination disorder show additional (usually sup-
pressed) motor activity, such as choreiform movements of unsupported limbs or mirror
movements. These “overflow” movements are referred to as neurodevelopmental immaturities or
neurological soft signs rather than neurological abnormalities. In both current literature and
clinical practice, their role in diagnosis is still unclear, requiring further evaluation.
Prevalence
The prevalence of developmental coordination disorder in children ages 5–11 years is 5%–
6% (in children age 7 years, 1.8% are diagnosed with severe developmental coordination
disorder and 3% with probable developmental coordination disorder). Males are more of-
ten affected than females, with a male:female ratio between 2:1 and 7:1.
Development and Course
The course of developmental coordination disorder is variable but stable at least to 1 year
follow-up. Although there may be improvement in the longer term, problems with coor-
76 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
dinated movements continue through adolescence in an estimated 50%–70% of children.
Onset is in early childhood. Delayed motor milestones may be the first signs, or the disor-
der is first recognized when the child attempts tasks such as holding a knife and fork, but-
toning clothes, or playing ball games. In middle childhood, there are difficulties with
motor aspects of assembling puzzles, building models, playing ball, and handwriting, as
well as with organizing belongings, when motor sequencing and coordination are re-
quired. In early adulthood, there is continuing difficulty in learning new tasks involving
complex/automatic motor skills, including driving and using tools. Inability to take notes
and handwrite quickly may affect performance in the workplace. Co-occurrence with
other disorders (see the section “Comorbidity” for this disorder) has an additional impact
on presentation, course, and outcome.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Developmental coordination disorder is more common following pre-
natal exposure to alcohol and in preterm and low-birth-weight children.
Genetic and physiological. Impairments in underlying neurodevelopmental processes—
particularly in visual-motor skills, both in visual-motor perception and spatial mentalizing—
have been found and affect the ability to make rapid motoric adjustments as the complexity of
the required movements increases. Cerebellar dysfunction has been proposed, but the neural
basis of developmental coordination disorder remains unclear. Because of the co-occurrence of
developmental coordination disorder with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
specific learning disabilities, and autism spectrum disorder, shared genetic effect has been pro-
posed. However, consistent co-occurrence in twins appears only in severe cases.
Course modifiers. Individuals with ADHD and with developmental coordination dis-
order demonstrate more impairment than individuals with ADHD without developmen-
tal coordination disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Developmental coordination disorder occurs across cultures, races, and socioeconomic
conditions. By definition, “activities of daily living” implies cultural differences necessi-
tating consideration of the context in which the individual child is living as well as
whether he or she has had appropriate opportunities to learn and practice such activities.
Functional Consequences of
Developmental Coordination Disorder
Developmental coordination disorder leads to impaired functional performance in activ-
ities of daily living (Criterion B), and the impairment is increased with co-occurring con-
ditions. Consequences of developmental coordination disorder include reduced
participation in team play and sports; poor self-esteem and sense of self-worth; emotional
or behavior problems; impaired academic achievement; poor physical fitness; and re-
duced physical activity and obesity.
Differential Diagnosis
Motor impairments due to another medical condition. Problems in coordination may
be associated with visual function impairment and specific neurological disorders (e.g.,
cerebral palsy, progressive lesions of the cerebellum, neuromuscular disorders). In such
cases, there are additional findings on neurological examination.
Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder). If intellectual disability is
present, motor competences may be impaired in accordance with the intellectual disabil-
Stereotypic Movement Disorder 77
ity. However, if the motor difficulties are in excess of what could be accounted for by the
intellectual disability, and criteria for developmental coordination disorder are met, de-
velopmental coordination disorder can be diagnosed as well.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Individuals with ADHD may fall, bump into
objects, or knock things over. Careful observation across different contexts is required to
ascertain if lack of motor competence is attributable to distractibility and impulsiveness
rather than to developmental coordination disorder. If criteria for both ADHD and devel-
opmental coordination disorder are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with autism spectrum disorder may be uninter-
ested in participating in tasks requiring complex coordination skills, such as ball sports,
which will affect test performance and function but not reflect core motor competence. Co-
occurrence of developmental coordination disorder and autism spectrum disorder is com-
mon. If criteria for both disorders are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Joint hypermobility syndrome. Individuals with syndromes causing hyperextensible
joints (found on physical examination; often with a complaint of pain) may present with
symptoms similar to those of developmental coordination disorder.
Comorbidity
Disorders that commonly co-occur with developmental coordination disorder include
speech and language disorder; specific learning disorder (especially reading and writing);
problems of inattention, including ADHD (the most frequent coexisting condition, with
about 50% co-occurrence); autism spectrum disorder; disruptive and emotional behavior
problems; and joint hypermobility syndrome. Different clusters of co-occurrence may be
present (e.g., a cluster with severe reading disorders, fine motor problems, and handwriting
problems; another cluster with impaired movement control and motor planning). Presence
of other disorders does not exclude developmental coordination disorder but may make
testing more difficult and may independently interfere with the execution of activities of
daily living, thus requiring examiner judgment in ascribing impairment to motor skills.
Stereotypic Movement Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 307.3 (F98.4)
A. Repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently purposeless motor behavior (e.g., hand
shaking or waving, body rocking, head banging, self-biting, hitting own body).
B. The repetitive motor behavior interferes with social, academic, or other activities and
may result in self-injury.
C. Onset is in the early developmental period.
D. The repetitive motor behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub-
stance or neurological condition and is not better explained by another neurodevel-
opmental or mental disorder (e.g., trichotillomania [hair-pulling disorder], obsessive-
compulsive disorder).
Specify if:
With self-injurious behavior (or behavior that would result in an injury if preventive
measures were not used)
Without self-injurious behavior
Specify if:
Associated with a known medical or genetic condition, neurodevelopmental dis-
order, or environmental factor (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, intellectual disability
[intellectual developmental disorder], intrauterine alcohol exposure)
78 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Coding note: Use additional code to identify the associated medical or genetic
condition, or neurodevelopmental disorder.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Symptoms are easily suppressed by sensory stimulus or distraction.
Moderate: Symptoms require explicit protective measures and behavioral modification.
Severe: Continuous monitoring and protective measures are required to prevent seri-
ous injury.
Recording Procedures
For stereotypic movement disorder that is associated with a known medical or genetic
condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or environmental factor, record stereotypic
movement disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., stereo-
typic movement disorder associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome).
Specifiers
The severity of non-self-injurious stereotypic movements ranges from mild presentations
that are easily suppressed by a sensory stimulus or distraction to continuous movements
that markedly interfere with all activities of daily living. Self-injurious behaviors range in se-
verity along various dimensions, including the frequency, impact on adaptive functioning,
and severity of bodily injury (from mild bruising or erythema from hitting hand against
body, to lacerations or amputation of digits, to retinal detachment from head banging).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of stereotypic movement disorder is repetitive, seemingly driven,
and apparently purposeless motor behavior (Criterion A). These behaviors are often
rhythmical movements of the head, hands, or body without obvious adaptive function.
The movements may or may not respond to efforts to stop them. Among typically devel-
oping children, the repetitive movements may be stopped when attention is directed to
them or when the child is distracted from performing them. Among children with neuro-
developmental disorders, the behaviors are typically less responsive to such efforts. In
other cases, the individual demonstrates self-restraining behaviors (e.g., sitting on hands,
wrapping arms in clothing, finding a protective device).
The repertoire of behaviors is variable; each individual presents with his or her own in-
dividually patterned, “signature” behavior. Examples of non-self-injurious stereotypic
movements include, but are not limited to, body rocking, bilateral flapping or rotating
hand movements, flicking or fluttering fingers in front of the face, arm waving or flapping,
and head nodding. Stereotyped self-injurious behaviors include, but are not limited to, re-
petitive head banging, face slapping, eye poking, and biting of hands, lips, or other body
parts. Eye poking is particularly concerning; it occurs more frequently among children
with visual impairment. Multiple movements may be combined (e.g., cocking the head,
rocking the torso, waving a small string repetitively in front of the face).
Stereotypic movements may occur many times during a day, lasting a few seconds to
several minutes or longer. Frequency can vary from many occurrences in a single day to
several weeks elapsing between episodes. The behaviors vary in context, occurring when
the individual is engrossed in other activities, when excited, stressed, fatigued, or bored.
Criterion A requires that the movements be “apparently” purposeless. However, some
functions may be served by the movements. For example, stereotypic movements might
reduce anxiety in response to external stressors.
Criterion B states that the stereotypic movements interfere with social, academic, or
other activities and, in some children, may result in self-injury (or would if protective mea-
sures were not used). If self-injury is present, it should be coded using the specifier. Onset
Stereotypic Movement Disorder 79
of stereotypic movements is in the early developmental period (Criterion C). Criterion D
states that the repetitive, stereotyped behavior in stereotypic movement disorder is not at-
tributable to the physiological effects of a substance or neurological condition and is not
better explained by another neurodevelopmental or mental disorder. The presence of
stereotypic movements may indicate an undetected neurodevelopmental problem, espe-
cially in children ages 1–3 years.
Prevalence
Simple stereotypic movements (e.g., rocking) are common in young typically developing chil-
dren. Complex stereotypic movements are much less common (occurring in approximately
3%–4%). Between 4% and 16% of individuals with intellectual disability (intellectual develop-
mental disorder) engage in stereotypy and self-injury. The risk is greater in individuals with
severe intellectual disability. Among individuals with intellectual disability living in res-
idential facilities, 10%–15% may have stereotypic movement disorder with self-injury.
Development and Course
Stereotypic movements typically begin within the first 3 years of life. Simple stereotypic move-
ments are common in infancy and may be involved in acquisition of motor mastery. In chil-
dren who develop complex motor stereotypies, approximately 80% exhibit symptoms before
24 months of age, 12% between 24 and 35 months, and 8% at 36 months or older. In most typ-
ically developing children, these movements resolve over time or can be suppressed. Onset of
complex motor stereotypies may be in infancy or later in the developmental period. Among
individuals with intellectual disability, the stereotyped, self-injurious behaviors may persist
for years, even though the typography or pattern of self-injury may change.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Social isolation is a risk factor for self-stimulation that may progress to
stereotypic movements with repetitive self-injury. Environmental stress may also trigger
stereotypic behavior. Fear may alter physiological state, resulting in increased frequency
of stereotypic behaviors.
Genetic and physiological. Lower cognitive functioning is linked to greater risk for stereo-
typic behaviors and poorer response to interventions. Stereotypic movements are more fre-
quent among individuals with moderate-to-severe/profound intellectual disability, who by
virtue of a particular syndrome (e.g., Rett syndrome) or environmental factor (e.g., an environ-
ment with relatively insufficient stimulation) seem to be at higher risk for stereotypies. Repet-
itive self-injurious behavior may be a behavioral phenotype in neurogenetic syndromes. For
example, in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, there are both stereotypic dystonic movements and self-
mutilation of fingers, lip biting, and other forms of self-injury unless the individual is re-
strained, and in Rett syndrome and Cornelia de Lange syndrome, self-injury may result from
the hand-to-mouth stereotypies. Stereotypic behaviors may result from a painful medical con-
dition (e.g., middle ear infection, dental problems, gastroesophageal reflux).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Stereotypic movement disorder, with or without self-injury, occurs in all races and cultures.
Cultural attitudes toward unusual behaviors may result in delayed diagnosis. Overall cultural
tolerance and attitudes toward stereotypic movement vary and must be considered.
Differential Diagnosis
Normal development. Simple stereotypic movements are common in infancy and early
childhood. Rocking may occur in the transition from sleep to awake, a behavior that usu-
80 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
ally resolves with age. Complex stereotypies are less common in typically developing
children and can usually be suppressed by distraction or sensory stimulation. The indi-
vidual’s daily routine is rarely affected, and the movements generally do not cause the
child distress. The diagnosis would not be appropriate in these circumstances.
Autism spectrum disorder. Stereotypic movements may be a presenting symptom of
autism spectrum disorder and should be considered when repetitive movements and be-
haviors are being evaluated. Deficits of social communication and reciprocity manifesting
in autism spectrum disorder are generally absent in stereotypic movement disorder, and
thus social interaction, social communication, and rigid repetitive behaviors and interests
are distinguishing features. When autism spectrum disorder is present, stereotypic move-
ment disorder is diagnosed only when there is self-injury or when the stereotypic behav-
iors are sufficiently severe to become a focus of treatment.
Tic disorders. Typically, stereotypies have an earlier age at onset (before 3 years) than
do tics, which have a mean age at onset of 5–7 years. They are consistent and fixed in their
pattern or topography compared with tics, which are variable in their presentation. Ste-
reotypies may involve arms, hands, or the entire body, while tics commonly involve eyes,
face, head, and shoulders. Stereotypies are more fixed, rhythmic, and prolonged in dura-
tion than tics, which, generally, are brief, rapid, random, and fluctuating. Tics and stereo-
typic movements are both reduced by distraction.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. Stereotypic movement disorder is dis-
tinguished from obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) by the absence of obsessions, as
well as by the nature of the repetitive behaviors. In OCD the individual feels driven to per-
form repetitive behaviors in response to an obsession or according to rules that must be ap-
plied rigidly, whereas in stereotypic movement disorder the behaviors are seemingly
driven but apparently purposeless. Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) and excoria-
tion (skin-picking) disorder are characterized by body-focused repetitive behaviors (i.e.,
hair pulling and skin picking) that may be seemingly driven but that are not apparently
purposeless, and that may not be patterned or rhythmical. Furthermore, onset in tricho-
tillomania and excoriation disorder is not typically in the early developmental period, but
rather around puberty or later.
Other neurological and medical conditions. The diagnosis of stereotypic movements
requires the exclusion of habits, mannerisms, paroxysmal dyskinesias, and benign he-
reditary chorea. A neurological history and examination are required to assess features
suggestive of other disorders, such as myoclonus, dystonia, tics, and chorea. Involuntary
movements associated with a neurological condition may be distinguished by their signs
and symptoms. For example, repetitive, stereotypic movements in tardive dyskinesia can
be distinguished by a history of chronic neuroleptic use and characteristic oral or facial
dyskinesia or irregular trunk or limb movements. These types of movements do not result
in self-injury. A diagnosis of stereotypic movement disorder is not appropriate for repet-
itive skin picking or scratching associated with amphetamine intoxication or abuse (e.g.,
patients are diagnosed with substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and re-
lated disorder) and repetitive choreoathetoid movements associated with other neurolog-
ical disorders.
Comorbidity
Stereotypic movement disorder may occur as a primary diagnosis or secondary to another
disorder. For example, stereotypies are a common manifestation of a variety of neuro-
genetic disorders, such as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, Rett syndrome, fragile X syndrome,
Cornelia de Lange syndrome, and Smith-Magenis syndrome. When stereotypic move-
ment disorder co-occurs with another medical condition, both should be coded.
Tic Disorders 81
Tic Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria
Note: A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movement or vocalization.
Tourette’s Disorder 307.23 (F95.2)
A. Both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics have been present at some time during
the illness, although not necessarily concurrently.
B. The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year since
first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., co-
caine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral encephalitis).
Persistent (Chronic) Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder 307.22 (F95.1)
A. Single or multiple motor or vocal tics have been present during the illness, but not both
motor and vocal.
B. The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year since
first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., co-
caine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral encephalitis).
E. Criteria have never been met for Tourette’s disorder.
Specify if:
With motor tics only
With vocal tics only
Provisional Tic Disorder 307.21 (F95.0)
A. Single or multiple motor and/or vocal tics.
B. The tics have been present for less than 1 year since first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., co-
caine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral encephalitis).
E. Criteria have never been met for Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor or
vocal tic disorder.
Specifiers
The “motor tics only” or “vocal tics only” specifier is only required for persistent (chronic)
motor or vocal tic disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Tic disorders comprise four diagnostic categories: Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chronic)
motor or vocal tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, and the other specified and unspecified
tic disorders. Diagnosis for any tic disorder is based on the presence of motor and/or vocal
tics (Criterion A), duration of tic symptoms (Criterion B), age at onset (Criterion C), and ab-
sence of any known cause such as another medical condition or substance use (Criterion D).
The tic disorders are hierarchical in order (i.e., Tourette’s disorder, followed by persistent
[chronic] motor or vocal tic disorder, followed by provisional tic disorder, followed by the
82 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
other specified and unspecified tic disorders), such that once a tic disorder at one level of the
hierarchy is diagnosed, a lower hierarchy diagnosis cannot be made (Criterion E).
Tics are sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movements or vocalizations. An
individual may have various tic symptoms over time, but at any point in time, the tic rep-
ertoire recurs in a characteristic fashion. Although tics can include almost any muscle group
or vocalization, certain tic symptoms, such as eye blinking or throat clearing, are common
across patient populations. Tics are generally experienced as involuntary but can be vol-
untarily suppressed for varying lengths of time.
Tics can be either simple or complex. Simple motor tics are of short duration (i.e., milli-
seconds) and can include eye blinking, shoulder shrugging, and extension of the extrem-
ities. Simple vocal tics include throat clearing, sniffing, and grunting often caused by
contraction of the diaphragm or muscles of the oropharynx. Complex motor tics are of lon-
ger duration (i.e., seconds) and often include a combination of simple tics such as simul-
taneous head turning and shoulder shrugging. Complex tics can appear purposeful, such
as a tic-like sexual or obscene gesture (copropraxia) or a tic-like imitation of someone else’s
movements (echopraxia). Similarly, complex vocal tics include repeating one’s own sounds
or words (palilalia), repeating the last-heard word or phrase (echolalia), or uttering socially
unacceptable words, including obscenities, or ethnic, racial, or religious slurs (coprolalia).
Importantly, coprolalia is an abrupt, sharp bark or grunt utterance and lacks the prosody
of similar inappropriate speech observed in human interactions.
The presence of motor and/or vocal tics varies across the four tic disorders (Criterion
A). For Tourette’s disorder, both motor and vocal tics must be present, whereas for per-
sistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, only motor or only vocal tics are present. For
provisional tic disorder, motor and/or vocal tics may be present. For other specified or un-
specified tic disorders, the movement disorder symptoms are best characterized as tics but
are atypical in presentation or age at onset, or have a known etiology.
The 1-year minimum duration criterion (Criterion B) assures that individuals diag-
nosed with either Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder
have had persistent symptoms. Tics wax and wane in severity, and some individuals may
have tic-free periods of weeks to months; however, an individual who has had tic symp-
toms of greater than 1 year’s duration since first tic onset would be considered to have per-
sistent symptoms regardless of duration of tic-free periods. For an individual with motor
and/or vocal tics of less than 1 year since first tic onset, a provisional tic disorder diagnosis
can be considered. There is no duration specification for other specified and unspecified tic
disorders. The onset of tics must occur prior to age 18 years (Criterion C). Tic disorders
typically begin in the prepubertal period, with an average age at onset between 4 and 6
years, and with the incidence of new-onset tic disorders decreasing in the teen years. New
onset of tic symptoms in adulthood is exceedingly rare and is often associated with expo-
sures to drugs (e.g., excessive cocaine use) or is a result of a central nervous system insult
(e.g., postviral encephalitis). Although tic onset is uncommon in teenagers and adults, it is
not uncommon for adolescents and adults to present for an initial diagnostic assessment
and, when carefully evaluated, provide a history of milder symptoms dating back to child-
hood. New-onset abnormal movements suggestive of tics outside of the usual age range
should result in evaluation for other movement disorders or for specific etiologies.
Tic symptoms cannot be attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or an-
other medical condition (Criterion D). When there is strong evidence from the history,
physical examination, and/or laboratory results to suggest a plausible, proximal, and
probable cause for a tic disorder, a diagnosis of other specified tic disorder should be used.
Having previously met diagnostic criteria for Tourette’s disorder negates a possible di-
agnosis of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder (Criterion E). Similarly, a previ-
ous diagnosis of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder negates a diagnosis of
provisional tic disorder or other specified or unspecified tic disorder (Criterion E).
Tic Disorders 83
Prevalence
Tics are common in childhood but transient in most cases. The estimated prevalence of
Tourette’s disorder ranges from 3 to 8 per 1,000 in school-age children. Males are more
commonly affected than females, with the ratio varying from 2:1 to 4:1. A national survey
in the United States estimated 3 per 1,000 for the prevalence of clinically identified cases.
The frequency of identified cases was lower among African Americans and Hispanic
Americans, which may be related to differences in access to care.
Development and Course
Onset of tics is typically between ages 4 and 6 years. Peak severity occurs between ages 10
and 12 years, with a decline in severity during adolescence. Many adults with tic disorders
experience diminished symptoms. A small percentage of individuals will have persis-
tently severe or worsening symptoms in adulthood.
Tic symptoms manifest similarly in all age groups and across the lifespan. Tics wax and
wane in severity and change in affected muscle groups and vocalizations over time. As
children get older, they begin to report their tics being associated with a premonitory
urge—a somatic sensation that precedes the tic—and a feeling of tension reduction follow-
ing the expression of the tic. Tics associated with a premonitory urge may be experienced
as not completely “involuntary” in that the urge and the tic can be resisted. An individual
may also feel the need to perform a tic in a specific way or repeat it until he or she achieves
the feeling that the tic has been done “just right.”
The vulnerability toward developing co-occurring conditions changes as individuals
pass through the age of risk for various co-occurring conditions. For example, prepubertal
children with tic disorders are more likely to experience attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and separation anxiety disorder
than are teenagers and adults, who are more likely to experience the new onset of major
depressive disorder, substance use disorder, or bipolar disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Tics are worsened by anxiety, excitement, and exhaustion and are better
during calm, focused activities. Individuals may have fewer tics when engaged in schoolwork
or tasks at work than when relaxing at home after school or in the evening. Stressful/exciting
events (e.g., taking a test, participating in exciting activities) often make tics worse.
Environmental. Observing a gesture or sound in another person may result in an indi-
vidual with a tic disorder making a similar gesture or sound, which may be incorrectly
perceived by others as purposeful. This can be a particular problem when the individual is
interacting with authority figures (e.g., teachers, supervisors, police).
Genetic and physiological. Genetic and environmental factors influence tic symptom
expression and severity. Important risk alleles for Tourette’s disorder and rare genetic
variants in families with tic disorders have been identified. Obstetrical complications,
older paternal age, lower birth weight, and maternal smoking during pregnancy are as-
sociated with worse tic severity.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Tic disorders do not appear to vary in clinical characteristics, course, or etiology by race,
ethnicity, and culture. However, race, ethnicity, and culture may impact how tic disorders
are perceived and managed in the family and community, as well as influencing patterns
of help seeking, and choices of treatment.
84 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males are more commonly affected than females, but there are no gender differences in the
kinds of tics, age at onset, or course. Women with persistent tic disorders may be more
likely to experience anxiety and depression.
Functional Consequences of Tic Disorders
Many individuals with mild to moderate tic severity experience no distress or impairment
in functioning and may even be unaware of their tics. Individuals with more severe symp-
toms generally have more impairment in daily living, but even individuals with moderate
or even severe tic disorders may function well. The presence of a co-occurring condition,
such as ADHD or OCD, can have greater impact on functioning. Less commonly, tics dis-
rupt functioning in daily activities and result in social isolation, interpersonal conflict,
peer victimization, inability to work or to go to school, and lower quality of life. The indi-
vidual also may experience substantial psychological distress. Rare complications of Tou-
rette’s disorder include physical injury, such as eye injury (from hitting oneself in the face),
and orthopedic and neurological injury (e.g., disc disease related to forceful head and neck
movements).
Differential Diagnosis
Abnormal movements that may accompany other medical conditions and stereotypic
movement disorder. Motor stereotypies are defined as involuntary rhythmic, repetitive,
predictable movements that appear purposeful but serve no obvious adaptive function or
purpose and stop with distraction. Examples include repetitive hand waving/rotating,
arm flapping, and finger wiggling. Motor stereotypies can be differentiated from tics based
on the former’s earlier age at onset (younger than 3 years), prolonged duration (seconds to
minutes), constant repetitive fixed form and location, exacerbation when engrossed in ac-
tivities, lack of a premonitory urge, and cessation with distraction (e.g., name called or
touched). Chorea represents rapid, random, continual, abrupt, irregular, unpredictable,
nonstereotyped actions that are usually bilateral and affect all parts of the body (i.e., face,
trunk, and limbs). The timing, direction, and distribution of movements vary from mo-
ment to moment, and movements usually worsen during attempted voluntary action. Dys-
tonia is the simultaneous sustained contracture of both agonist and antagonist muscles,
resulting in a distorted posture or movement of parts of the body. Dystonic postures are of-
ten triggered by attempts at voluntary movements and are not seen during sleep.
Substance-induced and paroxysmal dyskinesias. Paroxysmal dyskinesias usually oc-
cur as dystonic or choreoathetoid movements that are precipitated by voluntary move-
ment or exertion and less commonly arise from normal background activity.
Myoclonus. Myoclonus is characterized by a sudden unidirectional movement that is
often nonrhythmic. It may be worsened by movement and occur during sleep. Myoclonus
is differentiated from tics by its rapidity, lack of suppressibility, and absence of a premon-
itory urge.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. Differentiating obsessive-compulsive
behaviors from tics may be difficult. Clues favoring an obsessive-compulsive behavior in-
clude a cognitive-based drive (e.g., fear of contamination) and the need to perform the ac-
tion in a particular fashion a certain number of times, equally on both sides of the body, or
until a “just right” feeling is achieved. Impulse-control problems and other repetitive be-
haviors, including persistent hair pulling, skin picking, and nail biting, appear more goal
directed and complex than tics.
Other Specified Tic Disorder 85
Comorbidity
Many medical and psychiatric conditions have been described as co-occurring with tic disor-
ders, with ADHD and obsessive-compulsive and related disorders being particularly com-
mon. The obsessive-compulsive symptoms observed in tic disorder tend to be characterized
by more aggressive symmetry and order symptoms and poorer response to pharmacotherapy
with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Children with ADHD may demonstrate disrup-
tive behavior, social immaturity, and learning difficulties that may interfere with academic
progress and interpersonal relationships and lead to greater impairment than that caused by a
tic disorder. Individuals with tic disorders can also have other movement disorders and other
mental disorders, such as depressive, bipolar, or substance use disorders.
Other Specified Tic Disorder
307.20 (F95.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a tic disorder
that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other im-
portant areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for a tic disorder
or any of the disorders in the neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The other
specified tic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to com-
municate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for a tic disor-
der or any specific neurodevelopmental disorder. This is done by recording “other specified
tic disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “with onset after age 18 years”).
Unspecified Tic Disorder
307.20 (F95.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a tic disorder
that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other im-
portant areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for a tic disorder
or for any of the disorders in the neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The un-
specified tic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to
specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a tic disorder or for a specific neurode-
velopmental disorder, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information
to make a more specific diagnosis.
86 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Other Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Other Specified Neurodevelopmental Disorder
315.8 (F88)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a neurodevel-
opmental disorder that cause impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the
neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The other specified neurodevelopmental
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the
specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific neurode-
velopmental disorder. This is done by recording “other specified neurodevelopmental dis-
order” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “neurodevelopmental disorder associated with
prenatal alcohol exposure”).
An example of a presentation that can be specified using the “other specified” desig-
nation is the following:
Neurodevelopmental disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure: Neu-
rodevelopmental disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure is characterized
by a range of developmental disabilities following exposure to alcohol in utero.
Unspecified Neurodevelopmental Disorder
315.9 (F89)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a neurodevel-
opmental disorder that cause impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the
neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified neurodevelopmental dis-
order category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason
that the criteria are not met for a specific neurodevelopmental disorder, and includes pre-
sentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis
(e.g., in emergency room settings).
Schizophrenia Spectrum and
Other Psychotic Disorders
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders include schizophrenia,
other psychotic disorders, and schizotypal (personality) disorder. They are defined by ab-
normalities in one or more of the following five domains: delusions, hallucinations, disor-
ganized thinking (speech), grossly disorganized or abnormal motor behavior (including
catatonia), and negative symptoms.
Key Features That Define the Psychotic Disorders
Delusions
Delusions are fixed beliefs that are not amenable to change in light of conflicting evidence.
Their content may include a variety of themes (e.g., persecutory, referential, somatic, reli-
gious, grandiose). Persecutory delusions (i.e., belief that one is going to be harmed, harassed,
and so forth by an individual, organization, or other group) are most common. Referential
delusions (i.e., belief that certain gestures, comments, environmental cues, and so forth are
directed at oneself) are also common. Grandiose delusions (i.e., when an individual believes
that he or she has exceptional abilities, wealth, or fame) and erotomanic delusions (i.e., when
an individual believes falsely that another person is in love with him or her) are also seen.
Nihilistic delusions involve the conviction that a major catastrophe will occur, and somatic
delusions focus on preoccupations regarding health and organ function.
Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible and not understandable to
same-culture peers and do not derive from ordinary life experiences. An example of a bi-
zarre delusion is the belief that an outside force has removed his or her internal organs and
replaced them with someone else’s organs without leaving any wounds or scars. An ex-
ample of a nonbizarre delusion is the belief that one is under surveillance by the police, de-
spite a lack of convincing evidence. Delusions that express a loss of control over mind or
body are generally considered to be bizarre; these include the belief that one’s thoughts
have been “removed” by some outside force (thought withdrawal), that alien thoughts have
been put into one’s mind (thought insertion), or that one’s body or actions are being acted on
or manipulated by some outside force (delusions of control). The distinction between a de-
lusion and a strongly held idea is sometimes difficult to make and depends in part on the
degree of conviction with which the belief is held despite clear or reasonable contradictory
evidence regarding its veracity.
Hallucinations
Hallucinations are perception-like experiences that occur without an external stimulus.
They are vivid and clear, with the full force and impact of normal perceptions, and not
under voluntary control. They may occur in any sensory modality, but auditory halluci-
nations are the most common in schizophrenia and related disorders. Auditory hallucina-
tions are usually experienced as voices, whether familiar or unfamiliar, that are perceived
as distinct from the individual’s own thoughts. The hallucinations must occur in the con-
text of a clear sensorium; those that occur while falling asleep (hypnagogic) or waking up
87
88 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
(hypnopompic) are considered to be within the range of normal experience. Hallucinations
may be a normal part of religious experience in certain cultural contexts.
Disorganized Thinking (Speech)
Disorganized thinking (formal thought disorder) is typically inferred from the individual’s
speech. The individual may switch from one topic to another (derailment or loose associa-
tions). Answers to questions may be obliquely related or completely unrelated (tangential-
ity). Rarely, speech may be so severely disorganized that it is nearly incomprehensible and
resembles receptive aphasia in its linguistic disorganization (incoherence or “word salad”).
Because mildly disorganized speech is common and nonspecific, the symptom must be se-
vere enough to substantially impair effective communication. The severity of the impair-
ment may be difficult to evaluate if the person making the diagnosis comes from a
different linguistic background than that of the person being examined. Less severe dis-
organized thinking or speech may occur during the prodromal and residual periods of
schizophrenia.
Grossly Disorganized or Abnormal Motor Behavior
(Including Catatonia)
Grossly disorganized or abnormal motor behavior may manifest itself in a variety of ways,
ranging from childlike “silliness” to unpredictable agitation. Problems may be noted in
any form of goal-directed behavior, leading to difficulties in performing activities of daily
living.
Catatonic behavior is a marked decrease in reactivity to the environment. This ranges
from resistance to instructions (negativism); to maintaining a rigid, inappropriate or bi-
zarre posture; to a complete lack of verbal and motor responses (mutism and stupor). It can
also include purposeless and excessive motor activity without obvious cause (catatonic
excitement). Other features are repeated stereotyped movements, staring, grimacing,
mutism, and the echoing of speech. Although catatonia has historically been associated
with schizophrenia, catatonic symptoms are nonspecific and may occur in other mental
disorders (e.g., bipolar or depressive disorders with catatonia) and in medical conditions
(catatonic disorder due to another medical condition).
Negative Symptoms
Negative symptoms account for a substantial portion of the morbidity associated with
schizophrenia but are less prominent in other psychotic disorders. Two negative symp-
toms are particularly prominent in schizophrenia: diminished emotional expression and
avolition. Diminished emotional expression includes reductions in the expression of emo-
tions in the face, eye contact, intonation of speech (prosody), and movements of the hand,
head, and face that normally give an emotional emphasis to speech. Avolition is a decrease
in motivated self-initiated purposeful activities. The individual may sit for long periods of
time and show little interest in participating in work or social activities. Other negative
symptoms include alogia, anhedonia, and asociality. Alogia is manifested by diminished
speech output. Anhedonia is the decreased ability to experience pleasure from positive
stimuli or a degradation in the recollection of pleasure previously experienced. Asociality
refers to the apparent lack of interest in social interactions and may be associated with avo-
lition, but it can also be a manifestation of limited opportunities for social interactions.
Disorders in This Chapter
This chapter is organized along a gradient of psychopathology. Clinicians should first con-
sider conditions that do not reach full criteria for a psychotic disorder or are limited to one
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders 89
domain of psychopathology. Then they should consider time-limited conditions. Finally,
the diagnosis of a schizophrenia spectrum disorder requires the exclusion of another con-
dition that may give rise to psychosis.
Schizotypal personality disorder is noted within this chapter as it is considered within
the schizophrenia spectrum, although its full description is found in the chapter “Person-
ality Disorders.” The diagnosis schizotypal personality disorder captures a pervasive pat-
tern of social and interpersonal deficits, including reduced capacity for close relationships;
cognitive or perceptual distortions; and eccentricities of behavior, usually beginning by
early adulthood but in some cases first becoming apparent in childhood and adolescence.
Abnormalities of beliefs, thinking, and perception are below the threshold for the diagno-
sis of a psychotic disorder.
Two conditions are defined by abnormalities limited to one domain of psychosis: delu-
sions or catatonia. Delusional disorder is characterized by at least 1 month of delusions but
no other psychotic symptoms. Catatonia is described later in the chapter and further in this
discussion.
Brief psychotic disorder lasts more than 1 day and remits by 1 month. Schizophreni-
form disorder is characterized by a symptomatic presentation equivalent to that of schizo-
phrenia except for its duration (less than 6 months) and the absence of a requirement for a
decline in functioning.
Schizophrenia lasts for at least 6 months and includes at least 1 month of active-phase
symptoms. In schizoaffective disorder, a mood episode and the active-phase symptoms of
schizophrenia occur together and were preceded or are followed by at least 2 weeks of de-
lusions or hallucinations without prominent mood symptoms.
Psychotic disorders may be induced by another condition. In substance/medication-
induced psychotic disorder, the psychotic symptoms are judged to be a physiological con-
sequence of a drug of abuse, a medication, or toxin exposure and cease after removal of the
agent. In psychotic disorder due to another medical condition, the psychotic symptoms
are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
Catatonia can occur in several disorders, including neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bi-
polar, depressive, and other mental disorders. This chapter also includes the diagnoses
catatonia associated with another mental disorder (catatonia specifier), catatonic disorder
due to another medical condition, and unspecified catatonia, and the diagnostic criteria for
all three conditions are described together.
Other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disor-
ders are included for classifying psychotic presentations that do not meet the criteria for
any of the specific psychotic disorders, or psychotic symptomatology about which there is
inadequate or contradictory information.
Clinician-Rated Assessment of Symptoms and
Related Clinical Phenomena in Psychosis
Psychotic disorders are heterogeneous, and the severity of symptoms can predict impor-
tant aspects of the illness, such as the degree of cognitive or neurobiological deficits. To
move the field forward, a detailed framework for the assessment of severity is included in
Section III “Assessment Measures,” which may help with treatment planning, prognostic
decision making, and research on pathophysiological mechanisms. Section III “Assess-
ment Measures” also contains dimensional assessments of the primary symptoms of psy-
chosis, including hallucinations, delusions, disorganized speech (except for substance/
medication-induced psychotic disorder and psychotic disorder due to another medical
condition), abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms, as well as dimen-
sional assessments of depression and mania. The severity of mood symptoms in psychosis
has prognostic value and guides treatment. There is growing evidence that schizoaffective
90 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
disorder is not a distinct nosological category. Thus, dimensional assessments of depres-
sion and mania for all psychotic disorders alert clinicians to mood pathology and the need
to treat where appropriate. The Section III scale also includes a dimensional assessment of
cognitive impairment. Many individuals with psychotic disorders have impairments in a
range of cognitive domains that predict functional status. Clinical neuropsychological as-
sessment can help guide diagnosis and treatment, but brief assessments without formal
neuropsychological assessment can provide useful information that can be sufficient for
diagnostic purposes. Formal neuropsychological testing, when conducted, should be ad-
ministered and scored by personnel trained in the use of testing instruments. If a formal
neuropsychological assessment is not conducted, the clinician should use the best avail-
able information to make a judgment. Further research on these assessments is necessary
in order to determine their clinical utility; thus, the assessments available in Section III
should serve as a prototype to stimulate such research.
Schizotypal (Personality) Disorder
Criteria and text for schizotypal personality disorder can be found in the chapter “Person-
ality Disorders.” Because this disorder is considered part of the schizophrenia spectrum of
disorders, and is labeled in this section of ICD-9 and ICD-10 as schizotypal disorder, it is
listed in this chapter and discussed in detail in the DSM-5 chapter “Personality Disorders.”
Delusional Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 297.1 (F22)
A. B. The presence of one (or more) delusions with a duration of 1 month or longer.
Criterion A for schizophrenia has never been met.
Note: Hallucinations, if present, are not prominent and are related to the delusional
theme (e.g., the sensation of being infested with insects associated with delusions of
infestation).
C. Apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifications, functioning is not markedly
impaired, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd.
D. If manic or major depressive episodes have occurred, these have been brief relative
to the duration of the delusional periods.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or an-
other medical condition and is not better explained by another mental disorder, such
as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Specify whether:
Erotomanic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is that
another person is in love with the individual.
Grandiose type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is the
conviction of having some great (but unrecognized) talent or insight or having made
some important discovery.
Jealous type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the individual’s delusion
is that his or her spouse or lover is unfaithful.
Persecutory type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion in-
volves the individual’s belief that he or she is being conspired against, cheated, spied
on, followed, poisoned or drugged, maliciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in
the pursuit of long-term goals.
Somatic type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion involves
bodily functions or sensations.
Delusional Disorder 91
Mixed type: This subtype applies when no one delusional theme predominates.
Unspecified type: This subtype applies when the dominant delusional belief cannot
be clearly determined or is not described in the specific types (e.g., referential delu-
sions without a prominent persecutory or grandiose component).
Specify if:
With bizarre content: Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible, not
understandable, and not derived from ordinary life experiences (e.g., an individual’s be-
lief that a stranger has removed his or her internal organs and replaced them with some-
one else’s organs without leaving any wounds or scars).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder:
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meet-
ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe-
riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period dur-
ing which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the de-
fining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a
previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods be-
ing very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of delusional disorder can be made without using this severity specifier.
Subtypes
In erotomanic type, the central theme of the delusion is that another person is in love with
the individual. The person about whom this conviction is held is usually of higher status
(e.g., a famous individual or a superior at work) but can be a complete stranger. Efforts to
contact the object of the delusion are common. In grandiose type, the central theme of the de-
lusion is the conviction of having some great talent or insight or of having made some im-
portant discovery. Less commonly, the individual may have the delusion of having a
special relationship with a prominent individual or of being a prominent person (in which
case the actual individual may be regarded as an impostor). Grandiose delusions may
have a religious content. In jealous type, the central theme of the delusion is that of an un-
faithful partner. This belief is arrived at without due cause and is based on incorrect infer-
ences supported by small bits of “evidence” (e.g., disarrayed clothing). The individual
with the delusion usually confronts the spouse or lover and attempts to intervene in the
imagined infidelity. In persecutory type, the central theme of the delusion involves the in-
92 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
dividual’s belief of being conspired against, cheated, spied on, followed, poisoned, mali-
ciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals. Small slights
may be exaggerated and become the focus of a delusional system. The affected individual
may engage in repeated attempts to obtain satisfaction by legal or legislative action. Indi-
viduals with persecutory delusions are often resentful and angry and may resort to vio-
lence against those they believe are hurting them. In somatic type, the central theme of the
delusion involves bodily functions or sensations. Somatic delusions can occur in several
forms. Most common is the belief that the individual emits a foul odor; that there is an in-
festation of insects on or in the skin; that there is an internal parasite; that certain parts of
the body are misshapen or ugly; or that parts of the body are not functioning.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of delusional disorder is the presence of one or more delusions that
persist for at least 1 month (Criterion A). A diagnosis of delusional disorder is not given if
the individual has ever had a symptom presentation that met Criterion A for schizophre-
nia (Criterion B). Apart from the direct impact of the delusions, impairments in psychoso-
cial functioning may be more circumscribed than those seen in other psychotic disorders
such as schizophrenia, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd (Criterion C). If mood
episodes occur concurrently with the delusions, the total duration of these mood episodes
is brief relative to the total duration of the delusional periods (Criterion D). The delusions
are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another
medical condition (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) and are not better explained by another men-
tal disorder, such as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder (Crite-
rion E).
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Social, marital, or work problems can result from the delusional beliefs of delusional dis-
order. Individuals with delusional disorder may be able to factually describe that others
view their beliefs as irrational but are unable to accept this themselves (i.e., there may be
“factual insight” but no true insight). Many individuals develop irritable or dysphoric
mood, which can usually be understood as a reaction to their delusional beliefs. Anger and
violent behavior can occur with persecutory, jealous, and erotomanic types. The individ-
ual may engage in litigious or antagonistic behavior (e.g., sending hundreds of letters of
protest to the government). Legal difficulties can occur, particularly in jealous and eroto-
manic types.
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of delusional disorder has been estimated at around 0.2%, and the
most frequent subtype is persecutory. Delusional disorder, jealous type, is probably more
common in males than in females, but there are no major gender differences in the overall
frequency of delusional disorder.
Development and Course
On average, global function is generally better than that observed in schizophrenia. Al-
though the diagnosis is generally stable, a proportion of individuals go on to develop
Delusional Disorder 93
schizophrenia. Delusional disorder has a significant familial relationship with both
schizophrenia and schizotypal personality disorder. Although it can occur in younger age
groups, the condition may be more prevalent in older individuals.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
An individual’s cultural and religious background must be taken into account in evaluat-
ing the possible presence of delusional disorder. The content of delusions also varies
across cultural contexts.
Functional Consequences of Delusional Disorder
The functional impairment is usually more circumscribed than that seen with other psy-
chotic disorders, although in some cases, the impairment may be substantial and include
poor occupational functioning and social isolation. When poor psychosocial functioning is
present, delusional beliefs themselves often play a significant role. A common character-
istic of individuals with delusional disorder is the apparent normality of their behavior
and appearance when their delusional ideas are not being discussed or acted on.
Differential Diagnosis
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. If an individual with obsessive-compul-
sive disorder is completely convinced that his or her obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs
are true, then the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder, with absent insight/delu-
sional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than a diagnosis of delusional disorder.
Similarly, if an individual with body dysmorphic disorder is completely convinced that
his or her body dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true, then the diagnosis of body dysmor-
phic disorder, with absent insight/delusional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than
a diagnosis of delusional disorder.
Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, psychotic disorder due to another medical con-
dition, and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. Individuals with these
disorders may present with symptoms that suggest delusional disorder. For example, sim-
ple persecutory delusions in the context of major neurocognitive disorder would be di-
agnosed as major neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance. A substance/
medication-induced psychotic disorder cross-sectionally may be identical in symptom-
atology to delusional disorder but can be distinguished by the chronological relationship
of substance use to the onset and remission of the delusional beliefs.
Schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder. Delusional disorder can be distinguished
from schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder by the absence of the other character-
istic symptoms of the active phase of schizophrenia.
Depressive and bipolar disorders and schizoaffective disorder. These disorders may
be distinguished from delusional disorder by the temporal relationship between the mood
disturbance and the delusions and by the severity of the mood symptoms. If delusions oc-
cur exclusively during mood episodes, the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features. Mood symptoms that meet full criteria for a mood episode can be su-
perimposed on delusional disorder. Delusional disorder can be diagnosed only if the total
duration of all mood episodes remains brief relative to the total duration of the delusional
disturbance. If not, then a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spec-
trum and other psychotic disorder accompanied by other specified depressive disorder,
unspecified depressive disorder, other specified bipolar and related disorder, or unspeci-
fied bipolar and related disorder is appropriate.
94 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Brief Psychotic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 298.8 (F23)
A. Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms. At least one of these must be
(1), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
Note: Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanctioned response.
B. Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less than 1 month, with
eventual full return to premorbid level of functioning.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by major depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features or another psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia or catatonia,
and is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
With marked stressor(s) (brief reactive psychosis): If symptoms occur in response to
events that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar
circumstances in the individual’s culture.
Without marked stressor(s): If symptoms do not occur in response to events that,
singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar circum-
stances in the individual’s culture.
With postpartum onset: If onset is during pregnancy or within 4 weeks postpartum.
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental dis-
order, pp. 119–120, for definition)
Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with brief
psychotic disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder can be made without using this severity
specifier.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of brief psychotic disorder is a disturbance that involves the sudden
onset of at least one of the following positive psychotic symptoms: delusions, hallucina-
tions, disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence), or grossly abnormal
psychomotor behavior, including catatonia (Criterion A). Sudden onset is defined as
change from a nonpsychotic state to a clearly psychotic state within 2 weeks, usually with-
out a prodrome. An episode of the disturbance lasts at least 1 day but less than 1 month,
and the individual eventually has a full return to the premorbid level of functioning (Cri-
Brief Psychotic Disorder 95
terion B). The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features, by schizoaffective disorder, or by schizophrenia and is not attributable
to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a hallucinogen) or another medical condi-
tion (e.g., subdural hematoma) (Criterion C).
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with brief psychotic disorder typically experience emotional turmoil or over-
whelming confusion. They may have rapid shifts from one intense affect to another.
Although the disturbance is brief, the level of impairment may be severe, and supervision
may be required to ensure that nutritional and hygienic needs are met and that the indi-
vidual is protected from the consequences of poor judgment, cognitive impairment, or act-
ing on the basis of delusions. There appears to be an increased risk of suicidal behavior,
particularly during the acute episode.
Prevalence
In the United States, brief psychotic disorder may account for 9% of cases of first-onset
psychosis. Psychotic disturbances that meet Criteria A and C, but not Criterion B, for brief
psychotic disorder (i.e., duration of active symptoms is 1–6 months as opposed to remis-
sion within 1 month) are more common in developing countries than in developed coun-
tries. Brief psychotic disorder is twofold more common in females than in males.
Development and Course
Brief psychotic disorder may appear in adolescence or early adulthood, and onset can oc-
cur across the lifespan, with the average age at onset being the mid 30s. By definition, a
diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder requires a full remission of all symptoms and an
eventual full return to the premorbid level of functioning within 1 month of the onset of the
disturbance. In some individuals, the duration of psychotic symptoms may be quite brief
(e.g., a few days).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Preexisting personality disorders and traits (e.g., schizotypal person-
ality disorder; borderline personality disorder; or traits in the psychoticism domain, such
as perceptual dysregulation, and the negative affectivity domain, such as suspiciousness)
may predispose the individual to the development of the disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
It is important to distinguish symptoms of brief psychotic disorder from culturally sanc-
tioned response patterns. For example, in some religious ceremonies, an individual may
report hearing voices, but these do not generally persist and are not perceived as abnormal
by most members of the individual’s community. In addition, cultural and religious back-
ground must be taken into account when considering whether beliefs are delusional.
Functional Consequences of Brief Psychotic Disorder
Despite high rates of relapse, for most individuals, outcome is excellent in terms of social
functioning and symptomatology.
96 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions. A variety of medical disorders can manifest with psychotic
symptoms of short duration. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or a de-
lirium is diagnosed when there is evidence from the history, physical examination, or lab-
oratory tests that the delusions or hallucinations are the direct physiological consequence
of a specific medical condition (e.g., Cushing’s syndrome, brain tumor) (see “Psychotic
Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition” later in this chapter).
Substance-related disorders. Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder, sub-
stance-induced delirium, and substance intoxication are distinguished from brief psychotic
disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure to a toxin)
is judged to be etiologically related to the psychotic symptoms (see “Substance/Medication-
Induced Psychotic Disorder” later in this chapter). Laboratory tests, such as a urine drug
screen or a blood alcohol level, may be helpful in making this determination, as may a care-
ful history of substance use with attention to temporal relationships between substance in-
take and onset of the symptoms and to the nature of the substance being used.
Depressive and bipolar disorders. The diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder cannot be
made if the psychotic symptoms are better explained by a mood episode (i.e., the psychotic
symptoms occur exclusively during a full major depressive, manic, or mixed episode).
Other psychotic disorders. If the psychotic symptoms persist for 1 month or longer, the
diagnosis is either schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, depressive disorder
with psychotic features, bipolar disorder with psychotic features, or other specified or un-
specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, depending on the other
symptoms in the presentation. The differential diagnosis between brief psychotic disorder
and schizophreniform disorder is difficult when the psychotic symptoms have remitted be-
fore 1 month in response to successful treatment with medication. Careful attention should
be given to the possibility that a recurrent disorder (e.g., bipolar disorder, recurrent acute ex-
acerbations of schizophrenia) may be responsible for any recurring psychotic episodes.
Malingering and factitious disorders. An episode of factitious disorder, with predomi-
nantly psychological signs and symptoms, may have the appearance of brief psychotic
disorder, but in such cases there is evidence that the symptoms are intentionally produced.
When malingering involves apparently psychotic symptoms, there is usually evidence
that the illness is being feigned for an understandable goal.
Personality disorders. In certain individuals with personality disorders, psychosocial
stressors may precipitate brief periods of psychotic symptoms. These symptoms are usu-
ally transient and do not warrant a separate diagnosis. If psychotic symptoms persist for at
least 1 day, an additional diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder may be appropriate.
Schizophreniform Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 295.40 (F20.81)
A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a
1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2),
or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
Schizophreniform Disorder 97
B. An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. When the
diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be qualified as “provi-
sional.”
C. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have
been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have occurred
concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have occurred dur-
ing active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the total duration
of the active and residual periods of the illness.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
With good prognostic features: This specifier requires the presence of at least two
of the following features: onset of prominent psychotic symptoms within 4 weeks of the
first noticeable change in usual behavior or functioning; confusion or perplexity; good
premorbid social and occupational functioning; and absence of blunted or flat affect.
Without good prognostic features: This specifier is applied if two or more of the
above features have not been present.
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disor-
der, pp. 119–120, for definition).
Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with schizo-
phreniform disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder can be made without using this severity
specifier.
Note: For additional information on Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis, Develop-
ment and Course (age-related factors), Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues, Gender-Related
Diagnostic Issues, Differential Diagnosis, and Comorbidity, see the corresponding sec-
tions in schizophrenia.
Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of schizophreniform disorder are identical to those of schizo-
phrenia (Criterion A). Schizophreniform disorder is distinguished by its difference in du-
ration: the total duration of the illness, including prodromal, active, and residual phases, is
at least 1 month but less than 6 months (Criterion B). The duration requirement for schizo-
phreniform disorder is intermediate between that for brief psychotic disorder, which lasts
more than 1 day and remits by 1 month, and schizophrenia, which lasts for at least 6 months.
The diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder is made under two conditions. 1) when an ep-
isode of illness lasts between 1 and 6 months and the individual has already recovered,
and 2) when an individual is symptomatic for less than the 6 months’ duration required for
the diagnosis of schizophrenia but has not yet recovered. In this case, the diagnosis should
be noted as “schizophreniform disorder (provisional)” because it is uncertain if the indi-
vidual will recover from the disturbance within the 6-month period. If the disturbance per-
sists beyond 6 months, the diagnosis should be changed to schizophrenia.
98 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Another distinguishing feature of schizophreniform disorder is the lack of a criterion
requiring impaired social and occupational functioning. While such impairments may po-
tentially be present, they are not necessary for a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder.
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
As with schizophrenia, currently there are no laboratory or psychometric tests for schizo-
phreniform disorder. There are multiple brain regions where neuroimaging, neuropa-
thological, and neurophysiological research has indicated abnormalities, but none are
diagnostic.
Prevalence
Incidence of schizophreniform disorder across sociocultural settings is likely similar to
that observed in schizophrenia. In the United States and other developed countries, the in-
cidence is low, possibly fivefold less than that of schizophrenia. In developing countries,
the incidence may be higher, especially for the specifier “with good prognostic features”;
in some of these settings schizophreniform disorder may be as common as schizophrenia.
Development and Course
The development of schizophreniform disorder is similar to that of schizophrenia. About
one-third of individuals with an initial diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder (provi-
sional) recover within the 6-month period and schizophreniform disorder is their final di-
agnosis. The majority of the remaining two-thirds of individuals will eventually receive a
diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. have an increased risk for schizophrenia.
Relatives of individuals with schizophreniform disorder
Functional Consequences of
Schizophreniform Disorder
For the majority of individuals with schizophreniform disorder who eventually receive a
diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, the functional consequences are
similar to the consequences of those disorders. Most individuals experience dysfunction in
several areas of daily functioning, such as school or work, interpersonal relationships, and
self-care. Individuals who recover from schizophreniform disorder have better functional
outcomes.
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. A wide variety of mental and medical
conditions can manifest with psychotic symptoms that must be considered in the differ-
ential diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder. These include psychotic disorder due to
another medical condition or its treatment; delirium or major neurocognitive disorder;
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or delirium; depressive or bipolar
disorder with psychotic features; schizoaffective disorder; other specified or unspecified bi-
polar and related disorder; depressive or bipolar disorder with catatonic features; schizophre-
Schizophrenia 99
nia; brief psychotic disorder; delusional disorder; other specified or unspecified schizo-
phrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder; schizotypal, schizoid, or paranoid
personality disorders; autism spectrum disorder; disorders presenting in childhood with
disorganized speech; attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; obsessive-compulsive dis-
order; posttraumatic stress disorder; and traumatic brain injury.
Since the diagnostic criteria for schizophreniform disorder and schizophrenia differ
primarily in duration of illness, the discussion of the differential diagnosis of schizophre-
nia also applies to schizophreniform disorder.
Brief psychotic disorder. Schizophreniform disorder differs in duration from brief psy-
chotic disorder, which has a duration of less than 1 month.
Schizophrenia
Diagnostic Criteria 295.90 (F20.9)
A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a
1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
B. For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, level of function-
ing in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care, is
markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset is in childhood
or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of interpersonal, academic,
or occupational functioning).
C. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period
must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet Cri-
terion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual
symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may
be manifested by only negative symptoms or by two or more symptoms listed in Criterion
A present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
D. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features
have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have
occurred concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have
occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the
total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
F. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of child-
hood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delu-
sions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms of schizophrenia,
are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder
and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meet-
ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe-
riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
100 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a period of time
during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the
defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a
previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be deter-
mined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a remission and a
minimum of one relapse).
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods be-
ing very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder,
pp. 119–120, for definition).
Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with
schizophrenia to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of schizophrenia can be made without using this severity specifier.
Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia involve a range of cognitive, behavioral, and
emotional dysfunctions, but no single symptom is pathognomonic of the disorder. The di-
agnosis involves the recognition of a constellation of signs and symptoms associated with
impaired occupational or social functioning. Individuals with the disorder will vary sub-
stantially on most features, as schizophrenia is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome.
At least two Criterion A symptoms must be present for a significant portion of time
during a 1-month period or longer. At least one of these symptoms must be the clear pres-
ence of delusions (Criterion A1), hallucinations (Criterion A2), or disorganized speech
(Criterion A3). Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior (Criterion A4) and negative
symptoms (Criterion A5) may also be present. In those situations in which the active-
phase symptoms remit within a month in response to treatment, Criterion A is still met if the
clinician estimates that they would have persisted in the absence of treatment.
Schizophrenia involves impairment in one or more major areas of functioning (Crite-
rion B). If the disturbance begins in childhood or adolescence, the expected level of func-
tion is not attained. Comparing the individual with unaffected siblings may be helpful. The
dysfunction persists for a substantial period during the course of the disorder and does not
appear to be a direct result of any single feature. Avolition (i.e., reduced drive to pursue
goal-directed behavior; Criterion A5) is linked to the social dysfunction described under
Criterion B. There is also strong evidence for a relationship between cognitive impairment
(see the section “Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis” for this disorder) and func-
tional impairment in individuals with schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia 101
Some signs of the disturbance must persist for a continuous period of at least 6 months
(Criterion C). Prodromal symptoms often precede the active phase, and residual symp-
toms may follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or
delusions. Individuals may express a variety of unusual or odd beliefs that are not of de-
lusional proportions (e.g., ideas of reference or magical thinking); they may have unusual
perceptual experiences (e.g., sensing the presence of an unseen person); their speech may
be generally understandable but vague; and their behavior may be unusual but not grossly
disorganized (e.g., mumbling in public). Negative symptoms are common in the pro-
dromal and residual phases and can be severe. Individuals who had been socially active
may become withdrawn from previous routines. Such behaviors are often the first sign of
a disorder.
Mood symptoms and full mood episodes are common in schizophrenia and may be con-
current with active-phase symptomatology. However, as distinct from a psychotic mood dis-
order, a schizophrenia diagnosis requires the presence of delusions or hallucinations in the
absence of mood episodes. In addition, mood episodes, taken in total, should be present for
only a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with schizophrenia may display inappropriate affect (e.g., laughing in the ab-
sence of an appropriate stimulus); a dysphoric mood that can take the form of depression,
anxiety, or anger; a disturbed sleep pattern (e.g., daytime sleeping and nighttime activity);
and a lack of interest in eating or food refusal. Depersonalization, derealization, and so-
matic concerns may occur and sometimes reach delusional proportions. Anxiety and pho-
bias are common. Cognitive deficits in schizophrenia are common and are strongly linked
to vocational and functional impairments. These deficits can include decrements in declar-
ative memory, working memory, language function, and other executive functions, as well
as slower processing speed. Abnormalities in sensory processing and inhibitory capacity,
as well as reductions in attention, are also found. Some individuals with schizophrenia
show social cognition deficits, including deficits in the ability to infer the intentions of
other people (theory of mind), and may attend to and then interpret irrelevant events or
stimuli as meaningful, perhaps leading to the generation of explanatory delusions. These
impairments frequently persist during symptomatic remission.
Some individuals with psychosis may lack insight or awareness of their disorder (i.e.,
anosognosia). This lack of “insight” includes unawareness of symptoms of schizophrenia
and may be present throughout the entire course of the illness. Unawareness of illness is
typically a symptom of schizophrenia itself rather than a coping strategy. It is comparable
to the lack of awareness of neurological deficits following brain damage, termed anoso-
gnosia. This symptom is the most common predictor of non-adherence to treatment, and it
predicts higher relapse rates, increased number of involuntary treatments, poorer psycho-
social functioning, aggression, and a poorer course of illness.
Hostility and aggression can be associated with schizophrenia, although spontaneous
or random assault is uncommon. Aggression is more frequent for younger males and for
individuals with a past history of violence, non-adherence with treatment, substance
abuse, and impulsivity. It should be noted that the vast majority of persons with schizo-
phrenia are not aggressive and are more frequently victimized than are individuals in the
general population.
Currently, there are no radiological, laboratory, or psychometric tests for the disorder.
Differences are evident in multiple brain regions between groups of healthy individuals
102 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
and persons with schizophrenia, including evidence from neuroimaging, neuropatholog-
ical, and neurophysiological studies. Differences are also evident in cellular architecture,
white matter connectivity, and gray matter volume in a variety of regions such as the pre-
frontal and temporal cortices. Reduced overall brain volume has been observed, as well as
increased brain volume reduction with age. Brain volume reductions with age are more
pronounced in individuals with schizophrenia than in healthy individuals. Finally, indi-
viduals with schizophrenia appear to differ from individuals without the disorder in eye-
tracking and electrophysiological indices.
Neurological soft signs common in individuals with schizophrenia include impairments
in motor coordination, sensory integration, and motor sequencing of complex movements;
left-right confusion; and disinhibition of associated movements. In addition, minor phys-
ical anomalies of the face and limbs may occur.
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia appears to be approximately 0.3%–0.7%, al-
though there is reported variation by race/ethnicity, across countries, and by geographic
origin for immigrants and children of immigrants. The sex ratio differs across samples and
populations: for example, an emphasis on negative symptoms and longer duration of dis-
order (associated with poorer outcome) shows higher incidence rates for males, whereas
definitions allowing for the inclusion of more mood symptoms and brief presentations
(associated with better outcome) show equivalent risks for both sexes.
Development and Course
The psychotic features of schizophrenia typically emerge between the late teens and the
mid-30s; onset prior to adolescence is rare. The peak age at onset for the first psychotic ep-
isode is in the early- to mid-20s for males and in the late-20s for females. The onset may be
abrupt or insidious, but the majority of individuals manifest a slow and gradual develop-
ment of a variety of clinically significant signs and symptoms. Half of these individuals
complain of depressive symptoms. Earlier age at onset has traditionally been seen as a pre-
dictor of worse prognosis. However, the effect of age at onset is likely related to gender,
with males having worse premorbid adjustment, lower educational achievement, more
prominent negative symptoms and cognitive impairment, and in general a worse out-
come. Impaired cognition is common, and alterations in cognition are present during de-
velopment and precede the emergence of psychosis, taking the form of stable cognitive
impairments during adulthood. Cognitive impairments may persist when other symptoms
are in remission and contribute to the disability of the disease.
The predictors of course and outcome are largely unexplained, and course and outcome
may not be reliably predicted. The course appears to be favorable in about 20% of those
with schizophrenia, and a small number of individuals are reported to recover completely.
However, most individuals with schizophrenia still require formal or informal daily living
supports, and many remain chronically ill, with exacerbations and remissions of active
symptoms, while others have a course of progressive deterioration.
Psychotic symptoms tend to diminish over the life course, perhaps in association with
normal age-related declines in dopamine activity. Negative symptoms are more closely re-
lated to prognosis than are positive symptoms and tend to be the most persistent. Further-
more, cognitive deficits associated with the illness may not improve over the course of the
illness.
The essential features of schizophrenia are the same in childhood, but it is more diffi-
cult to make the diagnosis. In children, delusions and hallucinations may be less elaborate
than in adults, and visual hallucinations are more common and should be distinguished
from normal fantasy play. Disorganized speech occurs in many disorders with childhood
onset (e.g., autism spectrum disorder), as does disorganized behavior (e.g., attention-deficit/
Schizophrenia 103
hyperactivity disorder). These symptoms should not be attributed to schizophrenia with-
out due consideration of the more common disorders of childhood. Childhood-onset cases
tend to resemble poor-outcome adult cases, with gradual onset and prominent negative
symptoms. Children who later receive the diagnosis of schizophrenia are more likely to
have experienced nonspecific emotional-behavioral disturbances and psychopathology,
intellectual and language alterations, and subtle motor delays.
Late-onset cases (i.e., onset after age 40 years) are overrepresented by females, who
may have married. Often, the course is characterized by a predominance of psychotic
symptoms with preservation of affect and social functioning. Such late-onset cases can still
meet the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, but it is not yet clear whether this is the
same condition as schizophrenia diagnosed prior to mid-life (e.g., prior to age 55 years).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Season of birth has been linked to the incidence of schizophrenia, in-
cluding late winter/early spring in some locations and summer for the deficit form of the
disease. The incidence of schizophrenia and related disorders is higher for children grow-
ing up in an urban environment and for some minority ethnic groups.
Genetic and physiological. There is a strong contribution for genetic factors in deter-
mining risk for schizophrenia, although most individuals who have been diagnosed with
schizophrenia have no family history of psychosis. Liability is conferred by a spectrum of
risk alleles, common and rare, with each allele contributing only a small fraction to the to-
tal population variance. The risk alleles identified to date are also associated with other
mental disorders, including bipolar disorder, depression, and autism spectrum disorder.
Pregnancy and birth complications with hypoxia and greater paternal age are associated
with a higher risk of schizophrenia for the developing fetus. In addition, other prenatal
and perinatal adversities, including stress, infection, malnutrition, maternal diabetes, and
other medical conditions, have been linked with schizophrenia. However, the vast major-
ity of offspring with these risk factors do not develop schizophrenia.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly when the individual
and the clinician do not share the same cultural and socioeconomic background. Ideas that
appear to be delusional in one culture (e.g., witchcraft) may be commonly held in another.
In some cultures, visual or auditory hallucinations with a religious content (e.g., hearing
God’s voice) are a normal part of religious experience. In addition, the assessment of dis-
organized speech may be made difficult by linguistic variation in narrative styles across
cultures. The assessment of affect requires sensitivity to differences in styles of emotional
expression, eye contact, and body language, which vary across cultures. If the assessment
is conducted in a language that is different from the individual’s primary language, care
must be taken to ensure that alogia is not related to linguistic barriers. In certain cultures,
distress may take the form of hallucinations or pseudo-hallucinations and overvalued
ideas that may present clinically similar to true psychosis but are normative to the pa-
tient’s subgroup.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
A number of features distinguish the clinical expression of schizophrenia in females and
males. The general incidence of schizophrenia tends to be slightly lower in females, par-
ticularly among treated cases. The age at onset is later in females, with a second mid-life
peak as described earlier (see the section “Development and Course” for this disorder).
Symptoms tend to be more affect-laden among females, and there are more psychotic
symptoms, as well as a greater propensity for psychotic symptoms to worsen in later life.
104 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Other symptom differences include less frequent negative symptoms and disorganization.
Finally, social functioning tends to remain better preserved in females. There are, how-
ever, frequent exceptions to these general caveats.
Suicide Risk
Approximately 5%–6% of individuals with schizophrenia die by suicide, about 20% attempt
suicide on one or more occasions, and many more have significant suicidal ideation. Suicidal
behavior is sometimes in response to command hallucinations to harm oneself or others.
Suicide risk remains high over the whole lifespan for males and females, although it may be
especially high for younger males with comorbid substance use. Other risk factors include
having depressive symptoms or feelings of hopelessness and being unemployed, and the
risk is higher, also, in the period after a psychotic episode or hospital discharge.
Functional Consequences of Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is associated with significant social and occupational dysfunction. Making
educational progress and maintaining employment are frequently impaired by avolition
or other disorder manifestations, even when the cognitive skills are sufficient for the tasks
at hand. Most individuals are employed at a lower level than their parents, and most, par-
ticularly men, do not marry or have limited social contacts outside of their family.
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic or catatonic features. The distinc-
tion between schizophrenia and major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
features or with catatonia depends on the temporal relationship between the mood distur-
bance and the psychosis, and on the severity of the depressive or manic symptoms. If de-
lusions or hallucinations occur exclusively during a major depressive or manic episode,
the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features.
Schizoaffective disorder. A diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder requires that a major
depressive or manic episode occur concurrently with the active-phase symptoms and that
the mood symptoms be present for a majority of the total duration of the active periods.
Schizophreniform disorder and brief psychotic disorder. These disorders are of shorter
duration than schizophrenia as specified in Criterion C, which requires 6 months of symp-
toms. In schizophreniform disorder, the disturbance is present less than 6 months, and in
brief psychotic disorder, symptoms are present at least 1 day but less than 1 month.
Delusional disorder. Delusional disorder can be distinguished from schizophrenia by
the absence of the other symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia (e.g., delusions, prom-
inent auditory or visual hallucinations, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or cata-
tonic behavior, negative symptoms).
Schizotypal personality disorder. Schizotypal personality disorder may be distinguished
from schizophrenia by subthreshold symptoms that are associated with persistent person-
ality features.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder. Individuals with
obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder may present with poor or
absent insight, and the preoccupations may reach delusional proportions. But these
disorders are distinguished from schizophrenia by their prominent obsessions, compul-
sions, preoccupations with appearance or body odor, hoarding, or body-focused repeti-
tive behaviors.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Posttraumatic stress disorder may include flashbacks that
have a hallucinatory quality, and hypervigilance may reach paranoid proportions. But a trau-
Schizoaffective Disorder 105
matic event and characteristic symptom features relating to reliving or reacting to the event
are required to make the diagnosis.
Autism spectrum disorder or communication disorders. These disorders may also have
symptoms resembling a psychotic episode but are distinguished by their respective defi-
cits in social interaction with repetitive and restricted behaviors and other cognitive and
communication deficits. An individual with autism spectrum disorder or communication
disorder must have symptoms that meet full criteria for schizophrenia, with prominent
hallucinations or delusions for at least 1 month, in order to be diagnosed with schizophre-
nia as a comorbid condition.
Other mental disorders associated with a psychotic episode. The diagnosis of schizo-
phrenia is made only when the psychotic episode is persistent and not attributable to the
physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition. Individuals with a de-
lirium or major or minor neurocognitive disorder may present with psychotic symptoms,
but these would have a temporal relationship to the onset of cognitive changes consistent
with those disorders. Individuals with substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder
may present with symptoms characteristic of Criterion A for schizophrenia, but the sub-
stance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can usually be distinguished by the chron-
ological relationship of substance use to the onset and remission of the psychosis in the
absence of substance use.
Comorbidity
Rates of comorbidity with substance-related disorders are high in schizophrenia. Over
half of individuals with schizophrenia have tobacco use disorder and smoke cigarettes
regularly. Comorbidity with anxiety disorders is increasingly recognized in schizophre-
nia. Rates of obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic disorder are elevated in individuals
with schizophrenia compared with the general population. Schizotypal or paranoid per-
sonality disorder may sometimes precede the onset of schizophrenia.
Life expectancy is reduced in individuals with schizophrenia because of associated
medical conditions. Weight gain, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular and
pulmonary disease are more common in schizophrenia than in the general population.
Poor engagement in health maintenance behaviors (e.g., cancer screening, exercise) in-
creases the risk of chronic disease, but other disorder factors, including medications, life-
style, cigarette smoking, and diet, may also play a role. A shared vulnerability for
psychosis and medical disorders may explain some of the medical comorbidity of schizo-
phrenia.
Schizoaffective Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. An uninterrupted period of illness during which there is a major mood episode (major
depressive or manic) concurrent with Criterion A of schizophrenia.
Note: The major depressive episode must include Criterion A1: Depressed mood.
B. Delusions or hallucinations for 2 or more weeks in the absence of a major mood epi-
sode (depressive or manic) during the lifetime duration of the illness.
C. Symptoms that meet criteria for a major mood episode are present for the majority of
the total duration of the active and residual portions of the illness.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or another medical condition.
106 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Specify whether:
295.70 (F25.0) Bipolar type: This subtype applies if a manic episode is part of the pre-
sentation. Major depressive episodes may also occur.
295.70 (F25.1) Depressive type: This subtype applies if only major depressive epi-
sodes are part of the presentation.
Specify if:
With catatonia (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder,
pp. 119–120, for definition).
Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with
schizoaffective disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder
and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
First episode, currently in acute episode: First manifestation of the disorder meet-
ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe-
riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission: Partial remission is a time period dur-
ing which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the de-
fining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission: Full remission is a period of time after a
previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode: Multiple episodes may be deter-
mined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a remission and a
minimum of one relapse).
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous: Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods be-
ing very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder can be made without using this severity
specifier.
Note: For additional information on Development and Course (age-related factors), Risk
and Prognostic Factors (environmental risk factors), Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues,
and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues, see the corresponding sections in schizophrenia,
bipolar I and II disorders, and major depressive disorder in their respective chapters.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder is based on the assessment of an uninterrupted
period of illness during which the individual continues to display active or residual symp-
toms of psychotic illness. The diagnosis is usually, but not necessarily, made during the
period of psychotic illness. At some time during the period, Criterion A for schizophrenia
Schizoaffective Disorder 107
has to be met. Criteria B (social dysfunction) and F (exclusion of autism spectrum disorder
or other communication disorder of childhood onset) for schizophrenia do not have to be
met. In addition to meeting Criterion A for schizophrenia, there is a major mood episode
(major depressive or manic) (Criterion A for schizoaffective disorder). Because loss of in-
terest or pleasure is common in schizophrenia, to meet Criterion A for schizoaffective dis-
order, the major depressive episode must include pervasive depressed mood (i.e., the
presence of markedly diminished interest or pleasure is not sufficient). Episodes of de-
pression or mania are present for the majority of the total duration of the illness (i.e., after
Criterion A has been met) (Criterion C for schizoaffective disorder). To separate schizoaf-
fective disorder from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, delusions
or hallucinations must be present for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood epi-
sode (depressive or manic) at some point during the lifetime duration of the illness (Cri-
terion B for schizoaffective disorder). The symptoms must not be attributable to the effects
of a substance or another medical condition (Criterion D for schizoaffective disorder).
Criterion C for schizoaffective disorder specifies that mood symptoms meeting criteria
for a major mood episode must be present for the majority of the total duration of the ac-
tive and residual portion of the illness. Criterion C requires the assessment of mood symp-
toms for the entire course of a psychotic illness, which differs from the criterion in DSM-IV,
which required only an assessment of the current period of illness. If the mood symptoms
are present for only a relatively brief period, the diagnosis is schizophrenia, not schizoaf-
fective disorder. When deciding whether an individual’s presentation meets Criterion C,
the clinician should review the total duration of psychotic illness (i.e., both active and re-
sidual symptoms) and determine when significant mood symptoms (untreated or in need
of treatment with antidepressant and/or mood-stabilizing medication) accompanied the
psychotic symptoms. This determination requires sufficient historical information and
clinical judgment. For example, an individual with a 4-year history of active and residual
symptoms of schizophrenia develops depressive and manic episodes that, taken together,
do not occupy more than 1 year during the 4-year history of psychotic illness. This presen-
tation would not meet Criterion C.
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Occupational functioning is frequently impaired, but this is not a defining criterion (in
contrast to schizophrenia). Restricted social contact and difficulties with self-care are as-
sociated with schizoaffective disorder, but negative symptoms may be less severe and less
persistent than those seen in schizophrenia. Anosognosia (i.e., poor insight) is also com-
mon in schizoaffective disorder, but the deficits in insight may be less severe and perva-
sive than those in schizophrenia. Individuals with schizoaffective disorder may be at
increased risk for later developing episodes of major depressive disorder or bipolar disor-
der if mood symptoms continue following the remission of symptoms meeting Criterion A
for schizophrenia. There may be associated alcohol and other substance-related disorders.
There are no tests or biological measures that can assist in making the diagnosis of
schizoaffective disorder. Whether schizoaffective disorder differs from schizophrenia
with regard to associated features such as structural or functional brain abnormalities,
cognitive deficits, or genetic risk factors is not clear.
Prevalence
Schizoaffective disorder appears to be about one-third as common as schizophrenia. Life-
time prevalence of schizoaffective disorder is estimated to be 0.3%. The incidence of
108 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
schizoaffective disorder is higher in females than in males, mainly due to an increased in-
cidence of the depressive type among females.
Development and Course
The typical age at onset of schizoaffective disorder is early adulthood, although onset can
occur anywhere from adolescence to late in life. A significant number of individuals diag-
nosed with another psychotic illness initially will receive the diagnosis schizoaffective dis-
order later when the pattern of mood episodes has become more apparent. With the
current diagnostic Criterion C, it is expected that the diagnosis for some individuals will
convert from schizoaffective disorder to another disorder as mood symptoms become less
prominent. The prognosis for schizoaffective disorder is somewhat better than the prog-
nosis for schizophrenia but worse than the prognosis for mood disorders.
Schizoaffective disorder may occur in a variety of temporal patterns. The following is
a typical pattern: An individual may have pronounced auditory hallucinations and per-
secutory delusions for 2 months before the onset of a prominent major depressive episode.
The psychotic symptoms and the full major depressive episode are then present for 3 months.
Then, the individual recovers completely from the major depressive episode, but the psy-
chotic symptoms persist for another month before they too disappear. During this period
of illness, the individual’s symptoms concurrently met criteria for a major depressive ep-
isode and Criterion A for schizophrenia, and during this same period of illness, auditory
hallucinations and delusions were present both before and after the depressive phase. The
total period of illness lasted for about 6 months, with psychotic symptoms alone present
during the initial 2 months, both depressive and psychotic symptoms present during the
next 3 months, and psychotic symptoms alone present during the last month. In this in-
stance, the duration of the depressive episode was not brief relative to the total duration of
the psychotic disturbance, and thus the presentation qualifies for a diagnosis of schizoaf-
fective disorder.
The expression of psychotic symptoms across the lifespan is variable. Depressive or
manic symptoms can occur before the onset of psychosis, during acute psychotic episodes,
during residual periods, and after cessation of psychosis. For example, an individual
might present with prominent mood symptoms during the prodromal stage of schizo-
phrenia. This pattern is not necessarily indicative of schizoaffective disorder, since it is the
co-occurrence of psychotic and mood symptoms that is diagnostic. For an individual with
symptoms that clearly meet the criteria for schizoaffective disorder but who on further fol-
low-up only presents with residual psychotic symptoms (such as subthreshold psychosis
and/or prominent negative symptoms), the diagnosis may be changed to schizophrenia,
as the total proportion of psychotic illness compared with mood symptoms becomes more
prominent. Schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type, may be more common in young adults,
whereas schizoaffective disorder, depressive type, may be more common in older adults.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Among individuals with schizophrenia, there may be an in-
creased risk for schizoaffective disorder in first-degree relatives. The risk for schizoaffec-
tive disorder may be increased among individuals who have a first-degree relative with
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or schizoaffective disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly when the individual
and the clinician do not share the same cultural and economic background. Ideas that ap-
pear to be delusional in one culture (e.g., witchcraft) may be commonly held in another.
There is also some evidence in the literature for the overdiagnosis of schizophrenia com-
Schizoaffective Disorder 109
pared with schizoaffective disorder in African American and Hispanic populations, so
care must be taken to ensure a culturally appropriate evaluation that includes both psy-
chotic and affective symptoms.
Suicide Risk
The lifetime risk of suicide for schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder is 5%, and the
presence of depressive symptoms is correlated with a higher risk for suicide. There is ev-
idence that suicide rates are higher in North American populations than in European,
Eastern European, South American, and Indian populations of individuals with schizo-
phrenia or schizoaffective disorder.
Functional Consequences of Schizoaffective Disorder
Schizoaffective disorder is associated with social and occupational dysfunction, but dys-
function is not a diagnostic criterion (as it is for schizophrenia), and there is substantial
variability between individuals diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. A wide variety of psychiatric and med-
ical conditions can manifest with psychotic and mood symptoms that must be considered
in the differential diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. These include psychotic disorder
due to another medical condition; delirium; major neurocognitive disorder; substance/
medication-induced psychotic disorder or neurocognitive disorder; bipolar disorders
with psychotic features; major depressive disorder with psychotic features; depressive or
bipolar disorders with catatonic features; schizotypal, schizoid, or paranoid personality
disorder; brief psychotic disorder; schizophreniform disorder; schizophrenia; delusional
disorder; and other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders. Medical conditions and substance use can present with a combination of psy-
chotic and mood symptoms, and thus psychotic disorder due to another medical condition
needs to be excluded. Distinguishing schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia and
from depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic features is often difficult. Criterion
C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia, and Criterion B is
designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a depressive or bipolar disorder
with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective disorder can be distinguished
from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features due to the presence of prom-
inent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood
episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorders with psychotic features, the psy-
chotic features primarily occur during the mood episode(s). Because the relative propor-
tion of mood to psychotic symptoms may change over time, the appropriate diagnosis
may change from and to schizoaffective disorder (e.g., a diagnosis of schizoaffective dis-
order for a severe and prominent major depressive episode lasting 3 months during the
first 6 months of a persistent psychotic illness would be changed to schizophrenia if active
psychotic or prominent residual symptoms persist over several years without a recurrence
of another mood episode).
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Other medical conditions and
substance use can manifest with a combination of psychotic and mood symptoms, and
thus psychotic disorder due to another medical condition needs to be excluded.
Schizophrenia, bipolar, and depressive disorders. Distinguishing schizoaffective dis-
order from schizophrenia and from depressive and bipolar disorders with psychotic fea-
tures is often difficult. Criterion C is designed to separate schizoaffective disorder from
schizophrenia, and Criterion B is designed to distinguish schizoaffective disorder from a
110 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective
disorder can be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features
based on the presence of prominent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in
the absence of a major mood episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features, the psychotic features primarily occur during the mood episode(s). Be-
cause the relative proportion of mood to psychotic symptoms may change over time, the
appropriate diagnosis may change from and to schizoaffective disorder. (For example, a
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder for a severe and prominent major depressive episode
lasting 3 months during the first 6 months of a chronic psychotic illness would be changed
to schizophrenia if active psychotic or prominent residual symptoms persist over several
years without a recurrence of another mood episode.)
Comorbidity
Many individuals diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder are also diagnosed with other
mental disorders, especially substance use disorders and anxiety disorders. Similarly, the
incidence of medical conditions is increased above base rate for the general population
and leads to decreased life expectancy.
Substance/Medication-Induced
Psychotic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Presence of one or both of the following symptoms:
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
(1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite-
rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a psychotic disorder that is not substance/
medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent psychotic disorder could in-
clude the following:
The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms
persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of
acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence of an indepen-
dent non-substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder (e.g., a history of recur-
rent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical
picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic Disorder 111
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medica-
tion]-induced psychotic disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-
CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present
for the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the sub-
stance-induced psychotic disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should
record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced psychotic disorder
(e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced psychotic disorder”). If a moderate or
severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced psychotic disor-
der, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate [substance]
use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the co-
morbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after
a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the cli-
nician should record only the substance-induced psychotic disorder.
ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CM
With use
disorder,
mild
With use
disorder,
moderate
or severe
Without
use
disorder
Alcohol 291.9 F10.159 F10.259 F10.959
Cannabis 292.9 F12.159 F12.259 F12.959
Phencyclidine 292.9 F16.159 F16.259 F16.959
Other hallucinogen 292.9 F16.159 F16.259 F16.959
Inhalant 292.9 F18.159 F18.259 F18.959
Sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic
Amphetamine (or other
stimulant)
292.9 F13.159 F13.259 F13.959
292.9 F15.159 F15.259 F15.959
Cocaine 292.9 F14.159 F14.259 F14.959
Other (or unknown) substance 292.9 F19.159 F19.259 F19.959
Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for diag-
noses associated with substance class):
With onset during intoxication: If the criteria are met for intoxication with the sub-
stance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If the criteria are met for withdrawal from the sub-
stance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative
symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe
in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and
severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chap-
ter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can be made
without using this severity specifier.
112 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder begins
with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing
the delusions or hallucinations. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in
the criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit into any of
the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in
cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of sub-
stance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during withdrawal). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM,
which combine the substance-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a single
code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder. For
example, in the case of delusions occurring during intoxication in a man with a severe co-
caine use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.9 cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset
during intoxication. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine use disorder is also
given. When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development
of psychotic symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., 292.9 cannabis-induced psy-
chotic disorder with onset during intoxication, with severe cannabis use disorder; 292.9
phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication, with mild
phencyclidine use disorder).
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder begins
with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing
the delusions or hallucinations. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in
the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid
substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexa-
methasone), the code for “other substance” with no comorbid substance use should be
used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” with no comorbid sub-
stance use should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any)
is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
psychotic disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication,
onset during withdrawal). For example, in the case of delusions occurring during intoxi-
cation in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.259 severe cocaine
use disorder with cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication. A
separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the sub-
stance-induced psychotic disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder
(e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disor-
der is noted (e.g., F16.959 phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during in-
toxication). When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the
development of psychotic symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F12.259 severe
cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intox-
ication; F16.159 mild phencyclidine use disorder with phencyclidine-induced psychotic
disorder, with onset during intoxication).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder are prominent
delusions and/or hallucinations (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the physiolog-
ical effects of a substance/medication (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin expo-
sure) (Criterion B). Hallucinations that the individual realizes are substance/medication-
induced are not included here and instead would be diagnosed as substance intoxication
Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic Disorder 113
or substance withdrawal with the accompanying specifier “with perceptual disturbances”
(applies to alcohol withdrawal; cannabis intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal; and stimulant intoxication).
A substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is distinguished from a primary
psychotic disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors. For drugs of abuse,
there must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of
substance use, intoxication, or withdrawal. Substance/medication-induced psychotic
disorders arise during or soon after exposure to a medication or after substance intoxica-
tion or withdrawal but can persist for weeks, whereas primary psychotic disorders may
precede the onset of substance/medication use or may occur during times of sustained ab-
stinence. Once initiated, the psychotic symptoms may continue as long as the substance/
medication use continues. Another consideration is the presence of features that are atyp-
ical of a primary psychotic disorder (e.g., atypical age at onset or course). For example, the
appearance of delusions de novo in a person older than 35 years without a known history
of a primary psychotic disorder should suggest the possibility of a substance/medication-
induced psychotic disorder. Even a prior history of a primary psychotic disorder does not
rule out the possibility of a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. In contrast,
factors that suggest that the psychotic symptoms are better accounted for by a primary
psychotic disorder include persistence of psychotic symptoms for a substantial period of
time (i.e., a month or more) after the end of substance intoxication or acute substance with-
drawal or after cessation of medication use; or a history of prior recurrent primary psy-
chotic disorders. Other causes of psychotic symptoms must be considered even in an
individual with substance intoxication or withdrawal, because substance use problems are
not uncommon among individuals with non-substance/medication-induced psychotic
disorders.
In addition to the four symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Psychotic disorders can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; cannabis; hallucinogens, including phencyclidine and related sub-
stances; inhalants; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine);
and other (or unknown) substances. Psychotic disorders can occur in association with with-
drawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxio-
lytics; and other (or unknown) substances.
Some of the medications reported to evoke psychotic symptoms include anesthetics
and analgesics, anticholinergic agents, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antihypertensive
and cardiovascular medications, antimicrobial medications, antiparkinsonian medica-
tions, chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporine, procarbazine), corticosteroids, gastro-
intestinal medications, muscle relaxants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications,
other over-the-counter medications (e.g., phenylephrine, pseudoephedrine), antidepres-
sant medication, and disulfiram. Toxins reported to induce psychotic symptoms include
anticholinesterase, organophosphate insecticides, sarin and other nerve gases, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide, and volatile substances such as fuel or paint.
Prevalence
Prevalence of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder in the general popula-
tion is unknown. Between 7% and 25% of individuals presenting with a first episode of
psychosis in different settings are reported to have substance/medication-induced psy-
chotic disorder.
114 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Development and Course
The initiation of the disorder may vary considerably with the substance. For example,
smoking a high dose of cocaine may produce psychosis within minutes, whereas days or
weeks of high-dose alcohol or sedative use may be required to produce psychosis. Alco-
hol-induced psychotic disorder, with hallucinations, usually occurs only after prolonged,
heavy ingestion of alcohol in individuals who have moderate to severe alcohol use disorder,
and the hallucinations are generally auditory in nature.
Psychotic disorders induced by amphetamine and cocaine share similar clinical fea-
tures. Persecutory delusions may rapidly develop shortly after use of amphetamine or a
similarly acting sympathomimetic. The hallucination of bugs or vermin crawling in or un-
der the skin (formication) can lead to scratching and extensive skin excoriations. Cannabis-
induced psychotic disorder may develop shortly after high-dose cannabis use and usually
involves persecutory delusions, marked anxiety, emotional lability, and depersonalization.
The disorder usually remits within a day but in some cases may persist for a few days.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder may at times persist when the offend-
ing agent is removed, such that it may be difficult initially to distinguish it from an indepen-
dent psychotic disorder. Agents such as amphetamines, phencyclidine, and cocaine have been
reported to evoke temporary psychotic states that can sometimes persist for weeks or longer
despite removal of the agent and treatment with neuroleptic medication. In later life, poly-
pharmacy for medical conditions and exposure to medications for parkinsonism, cardiovas-
cular disease, and other medical disorders may be associated with a greater likelihood of
psychosis induced by prescription medications as opposed to substances of abuse.
Diagnostic Markers
With substances for which relevant blood levels are available (e.g., blood alcohol level,
other quantifiable blood levels such as digoxin), the presence of a level consistent with tox-
icity may increase diagnostic certainty.
Functional Consequences of
Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic Disorder
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is typically severely disabling and
consequently is observed most frequently in emergency rooms, as individuals are often
brought to the acute-care setting when it occurs. However, the disability is typically self-
limited and resolves upon removal of the offending agent.
Differential Diagnosis
Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal. Individuals intoxicated with stimu-
lants, cannabis, the opioid meperidine, or phencyclidine, or those withdrawing from alco-
hol or sedatives, may experience altered perceptions that they recognize as drug effects. If
reality testing for these experiences remains intact (i.e., the individual recognizes that the
perception is substance induced and neither believes in nor acts on it), the diagnosis is not
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. Instead, substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal, with perceptual disturbances, is diagnosed (e.g., cocaine intoxica-
tion, with perceptual disturbances). “Flashback” hallucinations that can occur long after
the use of hallucinogens has stopped are diagnosed as hallucinogen persisting perception
disorder. If substance/medication-induced psychotic symptoms occur exclusively during
the course of a delirium, as in severe forms of alcohol withdrawal, the psychotic symptoms
are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not diagnosed sepa-
rately. Delusions in the context of a major or mild neurocognitive disorder would be di-
agnosed as major or mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
Psychotic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 115
Primary psychotic disorder. A substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder is
distinguished from a primary psychotic disorder, such as schizophrenia, schizoaffective
disorder, delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder, other specified schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorder, or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorder, by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the
symptoms.
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. A substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder due to a prescribed treatment for a mental or medical condition must
have its onset while the individual is receiving the medication (or during withdrawal, if
there is a withdrawal syndrome associated with the medication). Because individuals with
medical conditions often take medications for those conditions, the clinician must con-
sider the possibility that the psychotic symptoms are caused by the physiological conse-
quences of the medical condition rather than the medication, in which case psychotic
disorder due to another medical condition is diagnosed. The history often provides the
primary basis for such a judgment. At times, a change in the treatment for the medical con-
dition (e.g., medication substitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine em-
pirically for that individual whether the medication is the causative agent. If the clinician
has ascertained that the disturbance is attributable to both a medical condition and sub-
stance/medication use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to another medical
condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) may be given.
Psychotic Disorder
Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Prominent hallucinations or delusions.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condi-
tion.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
Code based on predominant symptom:
293.81 (F06.2) With delusions: If delusions are the predominant symptom.
293.82 (F06.0) With hallucinations: If hallucinations are the predominant symptom.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental
disorder (e.g., 293.81 [F06.2] psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm, with de-
lusions). The other medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately
before the psychotic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 162.9 [C34.90] malignant
lung neoplasm; 293.81 [F06.2] psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm, with
delusions).
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative
symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe
in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and
116 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chap-
ter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note: Diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition can be made
without using this severity specifier.
Specifiers
In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the assess-
ment of cognition, depression, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition are promi-
nent delusions or hallucinations that are judged to be attributable to the physiological ef-
fects of another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder
(e.g., the symptoms are not a psychologically mediated response to a severe medical con-
dition, in which case a diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder, with marked stressor, would
be appropriate).
Hallucinations can occur in any sensory modality (i.e., visual, olfactory, gustatory, tac-
tile, or auditory), but certain etiological factors are likely to evoke specific hallucinatory
phenomena. Olfactory hallucinations are suggestive of temporal lobe epilepsy. Hallucina-
tions may vary from simple and unformed to highly complex and organized, depending
on etiological and environmental factors. Psychotic disorder due to another medical con-
dition is generally not diagnosed if the individual maintains reality testing for the hallu-
cinations and appreciates that they result from the medical condition. Delusions may have
a variety of themes, including somatic, grandiose, religious, and, most commonly, perse-
cutory. On the whole, however, associations between delusions and particular medical
conditions appear to be less specific than is the case for hallucinations.
In determining whether the psychotic disturbance is attributable to another medical
condition, the presence of a medical condition must be identified and considered to be the
etiology of the psychosis through a physiological mechanism. Although there are no
infallible guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the psychotic distur-
bance and the medical condition is etiological, several considerations provide some guidance.
One consideration is the presence of a temporal association between the onset, exacerba-
tion, or remission of the medical condition and that of the psychotic disturbance. A second
consideration is the presence of features that are atypical for a psychotic disorder (e.g.,
atypical age at onset or presence of visual or olfactory hallucinations). The disturbance must
also be distinguished from a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or an-
other mental disorder (e.g., an adjustment disorder).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The temporal association of the onset or exacerbation of the medical condition offers the
greatest diagnostic certainty that the delusions or hallucinations are attributable to a med-
ical condition. Additional factors may include concomitant treatments for the underlying
medical condition that confer a risk for psychosis independently, such as steroid treatment
for autoimmune disorders.
Prevalence
Prevalence rates for psychotic disorder due to another medical condition are difficult to es-
timate given the wide variety of underlying medical etiologies. Lifetime prevalence has
Psychotic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 117
been estimated to range from 0.21% to 0.54%. When the prevalence findings are stratified
by age group, individuals older than 65 years have a significantly greater prevalence of
0.74% compared with those in younger age groups. Rates of psychosis also vary according
to the underlying medical condition; conditions most commonly associated with psy-
chosis include untreated endocrine and metabolic disorders, autoimmune disorders (e.g.,
systemic lupus erythematosus, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor autoimmune en-
cephalitis), or temporal lobe epilepsy. Psychosis due to epilepsy has been further differ-
entiated into ictal, postictal, and interictal psychosis. The most common of these is postictal
psychosis, observed in 2%–7.8% of epilepsy patients. Among older individuals, there may
be a higher prevalence of the disorder in females, although additional gender-related fea-
tures are not clear and vary considerably with the gender distributions of the underlying
medical conditions.
Development and Course
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition may be a single transient state or it
may be recurrent, cycling with exacerbations and remissions of the underlying medical
condition. Although treatment of the underlying medical condition often results in a res-
olution of the psychosis, this is not always the case, and psychotic symptoms may persist
long after the medical event (e.g., psychotic disorder due to focal brain injury). In the con-
text of chronic conditions such as multiple sclerosis or chronic interictal psychosis of epi-
lepsy, the psychosis may assume a long-term course.
The expression of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition does not differ
substantially in phenomenology depending on age at occurrence. However, older age
groups have a higher prevalence of the disorder, which is most likely due to the increasing
medical burden associated with advanced age and the cumulative effects of deleterious
exposures and age-related processes (e.g., atherosclerosis). The nature of the underlying
medical conditions is likely to change across the lifespan, with younger age groups more
affected by epilepsy, head trauma, autoimmune, and neoplastic diseases of early to mid-
life, and older age groups more affected by stroke disease, anoxic events, and multiple sys-
tem comorbidities. Underlying factors with increasing age, such as preexisting cognitive
impairment as well as vision and hearing impairments, may incur a greater risk for psy-
chosis, possibly by serving to lower the threshold for experiencing psychosis.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Course modifiers. Identification and treatment of the underlying medical condition has
the greatest impact on course, although preexisting central nervous system injury may
confer a worse course outcome (e.g., head trauma, cerebrovascular disease).
Diagnostic Markers
The diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition depends on the clin-
ical condition of each individual, and the diagnostic tests will vary according to that con-
dition. A variety of medical conditions may cause psychotic symptoms. These include
neurological conditions (e.g., neoplasms, cerebrovascular disease, Huntington's disease,
multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, auditory or visual nerve injury or impairment, deafness,
migraine, central nervous system infections), endocrine conditions (e.g., hyper- and hypo-
thyroidism, hyper- and hypoparathyroidism, hyper- and hypoadrenocorticism), metabolic
conditions (e.g., hypoxia, hypercarbia, hypoglycemia), fluid or electrolyte imbalances,
hepatic or renal diseases, and autoimmune disorders with central nervous system involve-
ment (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus). The associated physical examination findings,
laboratory findings, and patterns of prevalence or onset reflect the etiological medical
condition.
118 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Suicide Risk
Suicide risk in the context of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is not
clearly delineated, although certain conditions such as epilepsy and multiple sclerosis are
associated with increased rates of suicide, which may be further increased in the presence
of psychosis.
Functional Consequences of Psychotic Disorder
Due to Another Medical Condition
Functional disability is typically severe in the context of psychotic disorder due to another
medical condition but will vary considerably by the type of condition and likely improve
with successful resolution of the condition.
Differential Diagnosis
Delirium. Hallucinations and delusions commonly occur in the context of a delirium;
however, a separate diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is
not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium. Delusions
in the context of a major or mild neurocognitive disorder would be diagnosed as major or
mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. If there is evidence of recent or
prolonged substance use (including medications with psychoactive effects), withdrawal
from a substance, or exposure to a toxin (e.g., LSD [lysergic acid diethylamide] intoxica-
tion, alcohol withdrawal), a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be
considered. Symptoms that occur during or shortly after (i.e., within 4 weeks) of substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after medication use may be especially indicative of a sub-
stance-induced psychotic disorder, depending on the character, duration, or amount of
the substance used. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a
medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to an-
other medical condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) can be
given.
Psychotic disorder. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition must be distin-
guished from a psychotic disorder (e.g., schizophrenia, delusional disorder, schizoaffective
disorder) or a depressive or bipolar disorder, with psychotic features. In psychotic disor-
ders and in depressive or bipolar disorders, with psychotic features, no specific and direct
causative physiological mechanisms associated with a medical condition can be demon-
strated. Late age at onset and the absence of a personal or family history of schizophrenia
or delusional disorder suggest the need for a thorough assessment to rule out the diagno-
sis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Auditory hallucinations that
involve voices speaking complex sentences are more characteristic of schizophrenia than
of psychotic disorder due to a medical condition. Other types of hallucinations (e.g., vi-
sual, olfactory) commonly signal a psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or
a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
Comorbidity
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition in individuals older than 80 years is
associated with concurrent major neurocognitive disorder (dementia).
Catatonia Associated With Another Mental Disorder (Catatonia Specifier) 119
Catatonia
Catatonia can occur in the context of several disorders, including neurodevelopmental,
psychotic, bipolar, depressive disorders, and other medical conditions (e.g., cerebral folate
deficiency, rare autoimmune and paraneoplastic disorders. The manual does not treat
catatonia as an independent class but recognizes a) catatonia associated with another men-
tal disorder (i.e., a neurodevelopmental, psychotic disorder, a bipolar disorder, a depres-
sive disorder, or other mental disorder), b) catatonic disorder due to another medical
condition, and c) unspecified catatonia.
Catatonia is defined by the presence of three or more of 12 psychomotor features in the
diagnostic criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder and catatonic dis-
order due to another medical condition. The essential feature of catatonia is a marked psy-
chomotor disturbance that may involve decreased motor activity, decreased engagement
during interview or physical examination, or excessive and peculiar motor activity. The
clinical presentation of catatonia can be puzzling, as the psychomotor disturbance may
range from marked unresponsiveness to marked agitation. Motoric immobility may be se-
vere (stupor) or moderate (catalepsy and waxy flexibility). Similarly, decreased engage-
ment may be severe (mutism) or moderate (negativism). Excessive and peculiar motor
behaviors can be complex (e.g., stereotypy) or simple (agitation) and may include echola-
lia and echopraxia. In extreme cases, the same individual may wax and wane between de-
creased and excessive motor activity. The seemingly opposing clinical features and
variable manifestations of the diagnosis contribute to a lack of awareness and decreased
recognition of catatonia. During severe stages of catatonia, the individual may need care-
ful supervision to avoid self-harm or harming others. There are potential risks from mal-
nutrition, exhaustion, hyperpyrexia and self-inflicted injury.
Catatonia Associated With Another
Mental Disorder (Catatonia Specifier)
293.89 (F06.1)
A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
1. Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
2. Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
3. Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
4. Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [exclude if known aphasia]).
5. Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
6. Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against gravity).
7. Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
8. Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed movements).
9. Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
10. Grimacing.
11. Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
12. Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
Coding note: Indicate the name of the associated mental disorder when recording the
name of the condition (i.e., 293.89 [F06.1] catatonia associated with major depressive dis-
order). Code first the associated mental disorder (e.g., neurodevelopmental disorder, brief
120 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder,
bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, or other mental disorder) (e.g., 295.70 [F25.1]
schizoaffective disorder, depressive type; 293.89 [F06.1] catatonia associated with
schizoaffective disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Catatonia associated with another mental disorder (catatonia specifier) may be used when
criteria are met for catatonia during the course of a neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipo-
lar, depressive, or other mental disorder. The catatonia specifier is appropriate when the
clinical picture is characterized by marked psychomotor disturbance and involves at least
three of the 12 diagnostic features listed in Criterion A. Catatonia is typically diagnosed in
an inpatient setting and occurs in up to 35% of individuals with schizophrenia, but the ma-
jority of catatonia cases involve individuals with depressive or bipolar disorders. Before
the catatonia specifier is used in neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipolar, depressive, or
other mental disorders, a wide variety of other medical conditions need to be ruled out;
these conditions include, but are not limited to, medical conditions due to infectious, met-
abolic, or neurological conditions (see “Catatonic Disorder Due to Another Medical Con-
dition”). Catatonia can also be a side effect of a medication (see the chapter “Medication-
Induced Movement Disorders and Other Adverse Effects of Medication”). Because of the
seriousness of the complications, particular attention should be paid to the possibility that
the catatonia is attributable to 333.92 (G21.0) neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Catatonic Disorder Due to
Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria 293.89 (F06.1)
A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms:
1. 2. 3. 4. Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [Note: not applicable if there is an
established aphasia]).
5. Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
6. Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against gravity).
7. Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
8. Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed movements).
9. Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
10. Grimacing.
11. Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
12. Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., a manic episode).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Unspecified Catatonia 121
Coding note: Include the name of the medical condition in the name of the mental disor-
der (e.g., 293.89 [F06.1]) catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy). The other
medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately before the cata-
tonic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 572.2 [K71.90] hepatic encephalopathy;
293.89 [F06.1] catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of catatonic disorder due to another medical condition is the presence
of catatonia that is judged to be attributed to the physiological effects of another medical
condition. Catatonia can be diagnosed by the presence of at least three of the 12 clinical fea-
tures in Criterion A. There must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings that the catatonia is attributable to another medical condition (Crite-
rion B). The diagnosis is not given if the catatonia is better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., manic episode) (Criterion C) or if it occurs exclusively during the course of
a delirium (Criterion D).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A variety of medical conditions may cause catatonia, especially neurological conditions
(e.g., neoplasms, head trauma, cerebrovascular disease, encephalitis) and metabolic con-
ditions (e.g., hypercalcemia, hepatic encephalopathy, homocystinuria, diabetic ketoacido-
sis). The associated physical examination findings, laboratory findings, and patterns of
prevalence and onset reflect those of the etiological medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of catatonic disorder due to another medical condition is not given if
the catatonia occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium or neuroleptic malignant
syndrome. If the individual is currently taking neuroleptic medication, consideration
should be given to medication-induced movement disorders (e.g., abnormal positioning
may be due to neuroleptic-induced acute dystonia) or neuroleptic malignant syndrome
(e.g., catatonic-like features may be present, along with associated vital sign and/or labo-
ratory abnormalities). Catatonic symptoms may be present in any of the following five
psychotic disorders: brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia,
schizoaffective disorder, and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. It may
also be present in some of the neurodevelopmental disorders, in all of the bipolar and de-
pressive disorders, and in other mental disorders.
Unspecified Catatonia
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of catatonia
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other impor-
tant areas of functioning but either the nature of the underlying mental disorder or other
medical condition is unclear, full criteria for catatonia are not met, or there is insufficient
information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Coding note: Code first 781.99 (R29.818) other symptoms involving nervous and muscu-
loskeletal systems, followed by 293.89 (F06.1) unspecified catatonia.
122 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Other Specified Schizophrenia Spectrum and
Other Psychotic Disorder
298.8 (F28)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a schizophre-
nia spectrum and other psychotic disorder that cause clinically significant distress or im-
pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but
do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorders diagnostic class. The other specified schizophrenia spectrum and oth-
er psychotic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to com-
municate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any
specific schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder. This is done by recording “oth-
er specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder” followed by the specific
reason (e.g., “persistent auditory hallucinations”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1. Persistent auditory hallucinations occurring in the absence of any other features.
2. Delusions with significant overlapping mood episodes: This includes persistent
delusions with periods of overlapping mood episodes that are present for a substantial
portion of the delusional disturbance (such that the criterion stipulating only brief mood
disturbance in delusional disorder is not met).
3. Attenuated psychosis syndrome: This syndrome is characterized by psychotic-like
symptoms that are below a threshold for full psychosis (e.g., the symptoms are less
severe and more transient, and insight is relatively maintained).
4. Delusional symptoms in partner of individual with delusional disorder: In the
context of a relationship, the delusional material from the dominant partner provides
content for delusional belief by the individual who may not otherwise entirely meet cri-
teria for delusional disorder.
Unspecified Schizophrenia Spectrum and
Other Psychotic Disorder
298.9 (F29)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a schizophre-
nia spectrum and other psychotic disorder that cause clinically significant distress or im-
pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but
do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the schizophrenia spectrum and oth-
er psychotic disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and oth-
er psychotic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to
specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific schizophrenia spectrum and
other psychotic disorder, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient informa-
tion to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Bipolar and
Related Disorders
Bipolar and related disorders are separated from the depressive disorders in
DSM-5 and placed between the chapters on schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders and depressive disorders in recognition of their place as a bridge between the
two diagnostic classes in terms of symptomatology, family history, and genetics. The di-
agnoses included in this chapter are bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic
disorder, substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder, bipolar and relat-
ed disorder due to another medical condition, other specified bipolar and related disor-
der, and unspecified bipolar and related disorder.
The bipolar I disorder criteria represent the modern understanding of the classic
manic-depressive disorder or affective psychosis described in the nineteenth century, dif-
fering from that classic description only to the extent that neither psychosis nor the lifetime
experience of a major depressive episode is a requirement. However, the vast majority of
individuals whose symptoms meet the criteria for a fully syndromal manic episode also
experience major depressive episodes during the course of their lives.
Bipolar II disorder, requiring the lifetime experience of at least one episode of major de-
pression and at least one hypomanic episode, is no longer thought to be a “milder” condition
than bipolar I disorder, largely because of the amount of time individuals with this con-
dition spend in depression and because the instability of mood experienced by individuals
with bipolar II disorder is typically accompanied by serious impairment in work and social
functioning.
The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is given to adults who experience at least 2 years
(for children, a full year) of both hypomanic and depressive periods without ever fulfilling
the criteria for an episode of mania, hypomania, or major depression.
A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medications, and several
medical conditions can be associated with manic-like phenomena. This fact is recognized
in the diagnoses of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and bipo-
lar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
The recognition that many individuals, particularly children and, to a lesser extent, ad-
olescents, experience bipolar-like phenomena that do not meet the criteria for bipolar I, bi-
polar II, or cyclothymic disorder is reflected in the availability of the other specified
bipolar and related disorder category. Indeed, specific criteria for a disorder involving
short-duration hypomania are provided in Section III in the hope of encouraging further
study of this disorder.
Bipolar I Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
For a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for a manic
episode. The manic episode may have been preceded by and may be followed by hypo-
manic or major depressive episodes.
123
124 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Manic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally and persistently increased goal-directed activity or energy, lasting at
least 1 week and present most of the day, nearly every day (or any duration if hospi-
talization is necessary).
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy or activity, three (or
more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) are present to a sig-
nificant degree and represent a noticeable change from usual behavior:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant external
stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
psychomotor agitation (i.e., purposeless non-goal-directed activity).
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse-
quences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or
foolish business investments).
C. The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment in social or
occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or oth-
ers, or there are psychotic features.
D. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication, other treatment) or to another medical condition.
Note: A full manic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g., medi-
cation, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond the
physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a manic episode and,
therefore, a bipolar I diagnosis.
Note: Criteria A–D constitute a manic episode. At least one lifetime manic episode is re-
quired for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Hypomanic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at least 4 consec-
utive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three (or
more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) have persisted, rep-
resent a noticeable change from usual behavior, and have been present to a significant
degree:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant external
stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
psychomotor agitation.
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse-
quences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or
foolish business investments).
Bipolar I Disorder 125
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is uncharac-
teristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupa-
tional functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic features, the
episode is, by definition, manic.
F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication, other treatment).
Note: A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond
the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a hypomanic episode
diagnosis. However, caution is indicated so that one or two symptoms (particularly in-
creased irritability, edginess, or agitation following antidepressant use) are not taken
as sufficient for diagnosis of a hypomanic episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bi-
polar diathesis.
Note: Criteria A–F constitute a hypomanic episode. Hypomanic episodes are common in
bipolar I disorder but are not required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Major Depressive Episode
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week
period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms
is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical condi-
tion.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjec-
tive report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,
appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the
day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than
5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every
day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
4. 5. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not
merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. 7. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delu-
sional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (ei-
ther by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation with-
out a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another
medical condition.
Note: Criteria A–C constitute a major depressive episode. Major depressive episodes are
common in bipolar I disorder but are not required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a
natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of intense
126 Bipolar and Related Disorders
sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Cri-
terion A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be un-
derstandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive
episode in addition to the normal response to a significant loss should also be carefully
considered. This decision inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on
the individual’s history and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context
of loss.1
Bipolar I Disorder
A. Criteria have been met for at least one manic episode (Criteria A–D under “Manic Ep-
isode” above).
B. The occurrence of the manic and major depressive episode(s) is not better explained
by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional dis-
order, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorder.
Coding and Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for bipolar I disorder is based on type of current or most recent epi-
sode and its status with respect to current severity, presence of psychotic features, and
remission status. Current severity and psychotic features are only indicated if full criteria
are currently met for a manic or major depressive episode. Remission specifiers are only
indicated if the full criteria are not currently met for a manic, hypomanic, or major depres-
sive episode. Codes are as follows:
Bipolar I disorder
Current or
most recent
episode
manic
Current or
most recent
episode
hypomanic*
Current or
most recent
episode
depressed
Current or
most recent
episode
unspecified**
Mild (p. 154) 296.41
(F31.11)
Moderate (p. 154) 296.42
(F31.12)
Severe (p. 154) 296.43
(F31.13)
NA 296.51
(F31.31)
NA 296.52
(F31.32)
NA 296.53
(F31.4)
NA
NA
NA
1 In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in
grief the predominant affect is feelings of emptiness and loss, while in MDE it is persistent
depressed mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is
likely to decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of
grief. These waves tend to be associated with thoughts or reminders of the deceased. The
depressed mood of a MDE is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations.
The pain of grief may be accompanied by positive emotions and humor that are uncharacteristic
of the pervasive unhappiness and misery characteristic of a major depressive episode. The
thought content associated with grief generally features a preoccupation with thoughts and
memories of the deceased, rather than the self-critical or pessimistic ruminations seen in a MDE.
In grief, self-esteem is generally preserved, whereas in a MDE, feelings of worthlessness and self-
loathing are common. If self-derogatory ideation is present in grief, it typically involves per-
ceived failings vis-à-vis the deceased (e.g., not visiting frequently enough, not telling the
deceased how much he or she was loved). If a bereaved individual thinks about death and dying,
such thoughts are generally focused on the deceased and possibly about “joining” the deceased,
whereas in a major depressive episode such thoughts are focused on ending one’s own life
because of feeling worthless, undeserving of life, or unable to cope with the pain of depression.
Bipolar I Disorder 127
Bipolar I disorder
Current or
most recent
episode
manic
Current or
most recent
episode
hypomanic*
Current or
most recent
episode
depressed
Current or
most recent
episode
unspecified**
With psychotic
features***
296.44
(F31.2)
(p. 152)
In partial
296.45
remission (p. 154)
(F31.73)
In full remission
296.46
(p. 154)
(F31.74)
Unspecified 296.40
(F31.9)
NA 296.54
(F31.5)
NA
296.45
(F31.71)
296.46
(F31.72)
296.40
(F31.9)
296.55
(F31.75)
296.56
(F31.76)
296.50
(F31.9)
NA
NA
NA
*Severity and psychotic specifiers do not apply; code 296.40 (F31.0) for cases not in remission.
**Severity, psychotic, and remission specifiers do not apply. Code 296.7 (F31.9).
***If psychotic features are present, code the “with psychotic features” specifier irrespective of epi-
sode severity.
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: bipolar
I disorder, type of current or most recent episode, severity/psychotic/remission specifiers,
followed by as many specifiers without codes as apply to the current or most recent epi-
sode.
Specify:
With anxious distress (p. 149)
With mixed features (pp. 149–150)
With rapid cycling (pp. 150–151)
With melancholic features (p. 151)
With atypical features (pp. 151–152)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 152)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 152)
With catatonia (p. 152). Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1).
With peripartum onset (pp. 152–153)
With seasonal pattern (pp. 153–154)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a manic episode is a distinct period during which there is an ab-
normally, persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and persistently increased
activity or energy that is present for most of the day, nearly every day, for a period of at
least 1 week (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary), accompanied by at least three
additional symptoms from Criterion B. If the mood is irritable rather than elevated or ex-
pansive, at least four Criterion B symptoms must be present.
Mood in a manic episode is often described as euphoric, excessively cheerful, high, or
“feeling on top of the world.” In some cases, the mood is of such a highly infectious quality
that it is easily recognized as excessive and may be characterized by unlimited and hap-
hazard enthusiasm for interpersonal, sexual, or occupational interactions. For example,
the individual may spontaneously start extensive conversations with strangers in public.
Often the predominant mood is irritable rather than elevated, particularly when the indi-
vidual’s wishes are denied or if the individual has been using substances. Rapid shifts in
mood over brief periods of time may occur and are referred to as lability (i.e., the alterna-
128 Bipolar and Related Disorders
tion among euphoria, dysphoria, and irritability). In children, happiness, silliness and
“goofiness” are normal in the context of special occasions; however, if these symptoms are
recurrent, inappropriate to the context, and beyond what is expected for the developmen-
tal level of the child, they may meet Criterion A. If the happiness is unusual for a child (i.e.,
distinct from baseline), and the mood change occurs at the same time as symptoms that
meet Criterion B for mania, diagnostic certainty is increased; however, the mood change
must be accompanied by persistently increased activity or energy levels that are obvious
to those who know the child well.
During the manic episode, the individual may engage in multiple overlapping new
projects. The projects are often initiated with little knowledge of the topic, and nothing seems
out of the individual’s reach. The increased activity levels may manifest at unusual hours of
the day.
Inflated self-esteem is typically present, ranging from uncritical self-confidence to marked
grandiosity, and may reach delusional proportions (Criterion B1). Despite lack of any partic-
ular experience or talent, the individual may embark on complex tasks such as writing a novel
or seeking publicity for some impractical invention. Grandiose delusions (e.g., of having a
special relationship to a famous person) are common. In children, overestimation of abilities
and belief that, for example, they are the best at a sport or the smartest in the class is normal;
however, when such beliefs are present despite clear evidence to the contrary or the child at-
tempts feats that are clearly dangerous and, most important, represent a change from the
child’s normal behavior, the grandiosity criterion should be considered satisfied.
One of the most common features is a decreased need for sleep (Criterion B2) and is
distinct from insomnia in which the individual wants to sleep or feels the need to sleep but
is unable. The individual may sleep little, if at all, or may awaken several hours earlier than
usual, feeling rested and full of energy. When the sleep disturbance is severe, the individ-
ual may go for days without sleep, yet not feel tired. Often a decreased need for sleep her-
alds the onset of a manic episode.
Speech can be rapid, pressured, loud, and difficult to interrupt (Criterion B3). Individ-
uals may talk continuously and without regard for others’ wishes to communicate, often
in an intrusive manner or without concern for the relevance of what is said. Speech is
sometimes characterized by jokes, puns, amusing irrelevancies, and theatricality, with
dramatic mannerisms, singing, and excessive gesturing. Loudness and forcefulness of
speech often become more important than what is conveyed. If the individual’s mood is
more irritable than expansive, speech may be marked by complaints, hostile comments, or
angry tirades, particularly if attempts are made to interrupt the individual. Both Criterion
A and Criterion B symptoms may be accompanied by symptoms of the opposite (i.e., de-
pressive) pole (see “with mixed features” specifier, pp. 149–150).
Often the individual’s thoughts race at a rate faster than they can be expressed through
speech (Criterion B4). Frequently there is flight of ideas evidenced by a nearly continuous flow
of accelerated speech, with abrupt shifts from one topic to another. When flight of ideas is se-
vere, speech may become disorganized, incoherent, and particularly distressful to the individ-
ual. Sometimes thoughts are experienced as so crowded that it is very difficult to speak.
Distractibility (Criterion B5) is evidenced by an inability to censor immaterial external
stimuli (e.g., the interviewer’s attire, background noises or conversations, furnishings in
the room) and often prevents individuals experiencing mania from holding a rational con-
versation or attending to instructions.
The increase in goal-directed activity often consists of excessive planning and partici-
pation in multiple activities, including sexual, occupational, political, or religious activi-
ties. Increased sexual drive, fantasies, and behavior are often present. Individuals in a manic
episode usually show increased sociability (e.g., renewing old acquaintances or calling or
contacting friends or even strangers), without regard to the intrusive, domineering, and
demanding nature of these interactions. They often display psychomotor agitation or rest-
lessness (i.e., purposeless activity) by pacing or by holding multiple conversations simulta-
Bipolar I Disorder 129
neously. Some individuals write excessive letters, e-mails, text messages, and so forth, on
many different topics to friends, public figures, or the media.
The increased activity criterion can be difficult to ascertain in children; however, when
the child takes on many tasks simultaneously, starts devising elaborate and unrealistic
plans for projects, develops previously absent and developmentally inappropriate sexual
preoccupations (not accounted for by sexual abuse or exposure to sexually explicit mate-
rial), then Criterion B might be met based on clinical judgment. It is essential to determine
whether the behavior represents a change from the child’s baseline behavior; occurs most
of the day, nearly every day for the requisite time period; and occurs in temporal associa-
tion with other symptoms of mania.
The expansive mood, excessive optimism, grandiosity, and poor judgment often lead
to reckless involvement in activities such as spending sprees, giving away possessions,
reckless driving, foolish business investments, and sexual promiscuity that is unusual for
the individual, even though these activities are likely to have catastrophic consequences
(Criterion B7). The individual may purchase many unneeded items without the money to
pay for them and, in some cases, give them away. Sexual behavior may include infidelity
or indiscriminate sexual encounters with strangers, often disregarding the risk of sexually
transmitted diseases or interpersonal consequences.
The manic episode must result in marked impairment in social or occupational func-
tioning or require hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others (e.g., financial losses, il-
legal activities, loss of employment, self-injurious behavior). By definition, the presence of
psychotic features during a manic episode also satisfies Criterion C.
Manic symptoms or syndromes that are attributable to the physiological effects of a
drug of abuse (e.g., in the context of cocaine or amphetamine intoxication), the side effects
of medications or treatments (e.g., steroids, L-dopa, antidepressants, stimulants), or an-
other medical condition do not count toward the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. However,
a fully syndromal manic episode that arises during treatment (e.g., with medications, elec-
troconvulsive therapy, light therapy) or drug use and persists beyond the physiological ef-
fect of the inducing agent (i.e., after a medication is fully out of the individual’s system or
the effects of electroconvulsive therapy would be expected to have dissipated completely)
is sufficient evidence for a manic episode diagnosis (Criterion D). Caution is indicated so
that one or two symptoms (particularly increased irritability, edginess, or agitation follow-
ing antidepressant use) are not taken as sufficient for diagnosis of a manic or hypomanic
episode, nor necessarily an indication of a bipolar disorder diathesis. It is necessary to
meet criteria for a manic episode to make a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, but it is not re-
quired to have hypomanic or major depressive episodes. However, they may precede or
follow a manic episode. Full descriptions of the diagnostic features of a hypomanic epi-
sode may be found within the text for bipolar II disorder, and the features of a major de-
pressive episode are described within the text for major depressive disorder.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
During a manic episode, individuals often do not perceive that they are ill or in need of treat-
ment and vehemently resist efforts to be treated. Individuals may change their dress, makeup,
or personal appearance to a more sexually suggestive or flamboyant style. Some perceive a
sharper sense of smell, hearing, or vision. Gambling and antisocial behaviors may accompany
the manic episode. Some individuals may become hostile and physically threatening to others
and, when delusional, may become physically assaultive or suicidal. Catastrophic conse-
quences of a manic episode (e.g., involuntary hospitalization, difficulties with the law, serious
financial difficulties) often result from poor judgment, loss of insight, and hyperactivity.
Mood may shift very rapidly to anger or depression. Depressive symptoms may occur
during a manic episode and, if present, may last moments, hours, or, more rarely, days (see
“with mixed features” specifier, pp. 149–150).
130 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence estimate in the continental United States was 0.6% for bipolar I
disorder as defined in DSM-IV. Twelve-month prevalence of bipolar I disorder across 11
countries ranged from 0.0% to 0.6%. The lifetime male-to-female prevalence ratio is ap-
proximately 1.1:1.
Development and Course
Mean age at onset of the first manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episode is approxi-
mately 18 years for bipolar I disorder. Special considerations are necessary to detect the di-
agnosis in children. Since children of the same chronological age may be at different
developmental stages, it is difficult to define with precision what is “normal” or “ex-
pected” at any given point. Therefore, each child should be judged according to his or her
own baseline. Onset occurs throughout the life cycle, including first onsets in the 60s or
70s. Onset of manic symptoms (e.g., sexual or social disinhibition) in late mid-life or late-
life should prompt consideration of medical conditions (e.g., frontotemporal neurocogni-
tive disorder) and of substance ingestion or withdrawal.
More than 90% of individuals who have a single manic episode go on to have recurrent
mood episodes. Approximately 60% of manic episodes occur immediately before a major
depressive episode. Individuals with bipolar I disorder who have multiple (four or more)
mood episodes (major depressive, manic, or hypomanic) within 1 year receive the speci-
fier “with rapid cycling.”
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Bipolar disorder is more common in high-income than in low-income
countries (1.4 vs. 0.7%). Separated, divorced, or widowed individuals have higher rates of
bipolar I disorder than do individuals who are married or have never been married, but
the direction of the association is unclear.
Genetic and physiological. A family history of bipolar disorder is one of the strongest and
most consistent risk factors for bipolar disorders. There is an average 10-fold increased risk
among adult relatives of individuals with bipolar I and bipolar II disorders. Magnitude of
risk increases with degree of kinship. Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder likely share a ge-
netic origin, reflected in familial co-aggregation of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Course modifiers. After an individual has a manic episode with psychotic features, subse-
quent manic episodes are more likely to include psychotic features. Incomplete inter-
episode recovery is more common when the current episode is accompanied by mood-
incongruent psychotic features.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Little information exists on specific cultural differences in the expression of bipolar I dis-
order. One possible explanation for this may be that diagnostic instruments are often
translated and applied in different cultures with no transcultural validation. In one U.S.
study, 12-month prevalence of bipolar I disorder was significantly lower for Afro-Carib-
beans than for African Americans or whites.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Females are more likely to experience rapid cycling and mixed states, and to have patterns of
comorbidity that differ from those of males, including higher rates of lifetime eating disor-
ders. Females with bipolar I or II disorder are more likely to experience depressive symptoms
than males. They also have a higher lifetime risk of alcohol use disorder than are males and a
much greater likelihood of alcohol use disorder than do females in the general population.
Bipolar I Disorder 131
Suicide Risk
The lifetime risk of suicide in individuals with bipolar disorder is estimated to be at least
15 times that of the general population. In fact, bipolar disorder may account for one-quar-
ter of all completed suicides. A past history of suicide attempt and percent days spent de-
pressed in the past year are associated with greater risk of suicide attempts or completions.
Functional Consequences of Bipolar I Disorder
Although many individuals with bipolar disorder return to a fully functional level be-
tween episodes, approximately 30% show severe impairment in work role function. Func-
tional recovery lags substantially behind recovery from symptoms, especially with respect
to occupational recovery, resulting in lower socioeconomic status despite equivalent lev-
els of education when compared with the general population. Individuals with bipolar I
disorder perform more poorly than healthy individuals on cognitive tests. Cognitive im-
pairments may contribute to vocational and interpersonal difficulties and persist through
the lifespan, even during euthymic periods.
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive disorder. Major depressive disorder may also be accompanied by hy-
pomanic or manic symptoms (i.e., fewer symptoms or for a shorter duration than required
for mania or hypomania). When the individual presents in an episode of major depression,
one must depend on corroborating history regarding past episodes of mania or hypoma-
nia. Symptoms of irritability may be associated with either major depressive disorder or
bipolar disorder, adding to diagnostic complexity.
Other bipolar disorders. Diagnosis of bipolar I disorder is differentiated from bipolar II
disorder by determining whether there have been any past episodes of mania. Other spec-
ified and unspecified bipolar and related disorders should be differentiated from bipolar I
and II disorders by considering whether either the episodes involving manic or hypo-
manic symptoms or the episodes of depressive symptoms fail to meet the full criteria for
those conditions.
Bipolar disorder due to another medical condition may be distinguished from bipolar
I and II disorders by identifying, based on best clinical evidence, a causally related medical
condition.
Generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, or other
anxiety disorders. These disorders need to be considered in the differential diagnosis as
either the primary disorder or, in some cases, a comorbid disorder. A careful history of
symptoms is needed to differentiate generalized anxiety disorder from bipolar disorder,
as anxious ruminations may be mistaken for racing thoughts, and efforts to minimize anx-
ious feelings may be taken as impulsive behavior. Similarly, symptoms of posttraumatic
stress disorder need to be differentiated from bipolar disorder. It is helpful to assess the ep-
isodic nature of the symptoms described, as well as to consider symptom triggers, in mak-
ing this differential diagnosis.
Substance/medication-induced bipolar disorder. Substance use disorders may mani-
fest with substance.medication-induced manic symptoms that must be distinguished
from bipolar I disorder; response to mood stabilizers during a substance/medication-
induced mania may not necessarily be diagnostic for bipolar disorder. There may be sub-
stantial overlap in view of the tendency for individuals with bipolar I disorder to overuse
substances during an episode. A primary diagnosis of bipolar disorder must be estab-
lished based on symptoms that remain once substances are no longer being used.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. This disorder may be misdiagnosed as bipolar
disorder, especially in adolescents and children. Many symptoms overlap with the symp-
132 Bipolar and Related Disorders
toms of mania, such as rapid speech, racing thoughts, distractibility, and less need for
sleep. The “double counting” of symptoms toward both ADHD and bipolar disorder can
be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether the symptom(s) represents a distinct episode.
Personality disorders. Personality disorders such as borderline personality disorder
may have substantial symptomatic overlap with bipolar disorders, since mood lability
and impulsivity are common in both conditions. Symptoms must represent a distinct ep-
isode, and the noticeable increase over baseline required for the diagnosis of bipolar dis-
order must be present. A diagnosis of a personality disorder should not be made during an
untreated mood episode.
Disorders with prominent irritability. In individuals with severe irritability, particularly
children and adolescents, care must be taken to apply the diagnosis of bipolar disorder
only to those who have had a clear episode of mania or hypomania—that is, a distinct time
period, of the required duration, during which the irritability was clearly different from
the individual’s baseline and was accompanied by the onset of Criterion B symptoms.
When a child’s irritability is persistent and particularly severe, the diagnosis of disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder would be more appropriate. Indeed, when any child is being
assessed for mania, it is essential that the symptoms represent a clear change from the
child’s typical behavior.
Comorbidity
Co-occurring mental disorders are common, with the most frequent disorders being any
anxiety disorder (e.g., panic attacks, social anxiety disorder [social phobia], specific pho-
bia), occurring in approximately three-fourths of individuals; ADHD, any disruptive, im-
pulse-control, or conduct disorder (e.g., intermittent explosive disorder, oppositional
defiant disorder, conduct disorder), and any substance use disorder (e.g., alcohol use dis-
order) occur in over half of individuals with bipolar I disorder. Adults with bipolar I dis-
order have high rates of serious and/or untreated co-occurring medical conditions.
Metabolic syndrome and migraine are more common among individuals with bipolar dis-
order than in the general population. More than half of individuals whose symptoms meet
criteria for bipolar disorder have an alcohol use disorder, and those with both disorders
are at greater risk for suicide attempt.
Bipolar II Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 296.89 (F31.81)
For a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for a cur-
rent or past hypomanic episode and the following criteria for a current or past major de-
pressive episode:
Hypomanic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at least 4 consec-
utive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three (or more)
of the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable), represent a no-
ticeable change from usual behavior, and have been present to a significant degree:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
Bipolar II Disorder 133
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant external
stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
psychomotor agitation.
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse-
quences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or
foolish business investments).
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is uncharac-
teristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupa-
tional functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic features, the
episode is, by definition, manic.
F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
Note: A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond
the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a hypomanic episode
diagnosis. However, caution is indicated so that one or two symptoms (particularly in-
creased irritability, edginess, or agitation following antidepressant use) are not taken
as sufficient for diagnosis of a hypomanic episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bi-
polar diathesis.
Major Depressive Episode
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week
period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms
is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to a medical condition.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjec-
tive report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,
appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the
day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than
5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every
day. (Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
4. 5. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not
merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. 7. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delu-
sional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (ei-
ther by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation with-
out a specific plan, a suicide attempt, or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another
medical condition.
134 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Note: Criteria A–C above constitute a major depressive episode.
Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a nat-
ural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of intense sad-
ness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Criterion
A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be under-
standable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode
in addition to the normal response to a significant loss should be carefully considered. This
decision inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s history
and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context of loss.1
Bipolar II Disorder
A. Criteria have been met for at least one hypomanic episode (Criteria A–F under “Hypo-
manic Episode” above) and at least one major depressive episode (Criteria A–C under
“Major Depressive Episode” above).
B. There has never been a manic episode.
C. The occurrence of the hypomanic episode(s) and major depressive episode(s) is not
better explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disor-
der, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and
other psychotic disorder.
D. The symptoms of depression or the unpredictability caused by frequent alternation be-
tween periods of depression and hypomania causes clinically significant distress or im-
pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding and Recording Procedures
Bipolar II disorder has one diagnostic code: 296.89 (F31.81). Its status with respect to cur-
rent severity, presence of psychotic features, course, and other specifiers cannot be
coded but should be indicated in writing (e.g., 296.89 [F31.81] bipolar II disorder, current
episode depressed, moderate severity, with mixed features; 296.89 [F31.81] bipolar II dis-
order, most recent episode depressed, in partial remission).
Specify current or most recent episode:
Hypomanic
Depressed
Specify if:
With anxious distress (p. 149)
With mixed features (pp. 149–150)
1 In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in grief
the predominant affect is feelings of emptiness and loss, while in a MDE it is persistent depressed
mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is likely to
decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of grief. These
waves tend to be associated with thoughts or reminders of the deceased. The depressed mood of a
MDE is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations. The pain of grief may
be accompanied by positive emotions and humor that are uncharacteristic of the pervasive unhap-
piness and misery characteristic of a MDE. The thought content associated with grief generally fea-
tures a preoccupation with thoughts and memories of the deceased, rather than the self-critical or
pessimistic ruminations seen in a MDE. In grief, self-esteem is generally preserved, whereas in a
MDE feelings of worthlessness and self-loathing are common. If self-derogatory ideation is present
in grief, it typically involves perceived failings vis-à-vis the deceased (e.g., not visiting frequently
enough, not telling the deceased how much he or she was loved). If a bereaved individual thinks
about death and dying, such thoughts are generally focused on the deceased and possibly about
“'joining” the deceased, whereas in a MDE such thoughts are focused on ending one’s own life
because of feeling worthless, undeserving of life, or unable to cope with the pain of depression.
Bipolar II Disorder 135
With rapid cycling (pp. 150–151)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 152)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 152)
With catatonia (p. 152). Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1).
With peripartum onset (pp. 152–153)
With seasonal pattern (pp. 153–154): Applies only to the pattern of major depressive
episodes.
Specify course if full criteria for a mood episode are not currently met:
In partial remission (p. 154)
In full remission (p. 154)
Specify severity if full criteria for a mood episode are currently met:
Mild (p. 154)
Moderate (p. 154)
Severe (p. 154)
Diagnostic Features
Bipolar II disorder is characterized by a clinical course of recurring mood episodes con-
sisting of one or more major depressive episodes (Criteria A–C under “Major Depressive
Episode”) and at least one hypomanic episode (Criteria A–F under “Hypomanic Epi-
sode”). The major depressive episode must last at least 2 weeks, and the hypomanic epi-
sode must last at least 4 days, to meet the diagnostic criteria. During the mood episode(s),
the requisite number of symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day, and
represent a noticeable change from usual behavior and functioning. The presence of a
manic episode during the course of illness precludes the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder
(Criterion B under “Bipolar II Disorder”). Episodes of substance/medication-induced de-
pressive disorder or substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder (repre-
senting the physiological effects of a medication, other somatic treatments for depression,
drugs of abuse, or toxin exposure) or of depressive and related disorder due to another
medical condition or bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition do not
count toward a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder unless they persist beyond the physiolog-
ical effects of the treatment or substance and then meet duration criteria for an episode. In
addition, the episodes must not be better accounted for by schizoaffective disorder and are
not superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or
other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum or other psychotic disorders (Cri-
terion C under “Bipolar II Disorder”). The depressive episodes or hypomanic fluctuations
must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning (Criterion D under “Bipolar II Disorder”); however, for hy-
pomanic episodes, this requirement does not have to be met. A hypomanic episode that
causes significant impairment would likely qualify for the diagnosis of manic episode and,
therefore, for a lifetime diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. The recurrent major depressive ep-
isodes are often more frequent and lengthier than those occurring in bipolar I disorder.
Individuals with bipolar II disorder typically present to a clinician during a major de-
pressive episode and are unlikely to complain initially of hypomania. Typically, the hy-
pomanic episodes themselves do not cause impairment. Instead, the impairment results
from the major depressive episodes or from a persistent pattern of unpredictable mood
changes and fluctuating, unreliable interpersonal or occupational functioning. Individu-
als with bipolar II disorder may not view the hypomanic episodes as pathological or dis-
advantageous, although others may be troubled by the individual’s erratic behavior.
Clinical information from other informants, such as close friends or relatives, is often use-
ful in establishing the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder.
136 Bipolar and Related Disorders
A hypomanic episode should not be confused with the several days of euthymia and re-
stored energy or activity that may follow remission of a major depressive episode. Despite the
substantial differences in duration and severity between a manic and hypomanic episode, bi-
polar II disorder is not a “milder form” of bipolar I disorder. Compared with individuals with
bipolar I disorder, individuals with bipolar II disorder have greater chronicity of illness and
spend, on average, more time in the depressive phase of their illness, which can be severe and/
or disabling. Depressive symptoms co-occurring with a hypomanic episode or hypomanic
symptoms co-occurring with a depressive episode are common in individuals with bipolar II
disorder and are overrepresented in females, particularly hypomania with mixed features. In-
dividuals experiencing hypomania with mixed features may not label their symptoms as hy-
pomania, but instead experience them as depression with increased energy or irritability.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A common feature of bipolar II disorder is impulsivity, which can contribute to suicide at-
tempts and substance use disorders. Impulsivity may also stem from a concurrent person-
ality disorder, substance use disorder, anxiety disorder, another mental disorder, or a
medical condition. There may be heightened levels of creativity in some individuals with
a bipolar disorder. However, that relationship may be nonlinear; that is, greater lifetime
creative accomplishments have been associated with milder forms of bipolar disorder, and
higher creativity has been found in unaffected family members. The individual’s attach-
ment to heightened creativity during hypomanic episodes may contribute to ambivalence
about seeking treatment or undermine adherence to treatment.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of bipolar II disorder, internationally, is 0.3%. In the United
States, 12-month prevalence is 0.8%. The prevalence rate of pediatric bipolar II disorder is
difficult to establish. DSM-IV bipolar I, bipolar II, and bipolar disorder not otherwise spec-
ified yield a combined prevalence rate of 1.8% in U.S. and non-U.S. community samples,
with higher rates (2.7% inclusive) in youths age 12 years or older.
Development and Course
Although bipolar II disorder can begin in late adolescence and throughout adulthood, av-
erage age at onset is the mid-20s, which is slightly later than for bipolar I disorder but ear-
lier than for major depressive disorder. The illness most often begins with a depressive
episode and is not recognized as bipolar II disorder until a hypomanic episode occurs; this
happens in about 12% of individuals with the initial diagnosis of major depressive disor-
der. Anxiety, substance use, or eating disorders may also precede the diagnosis, compli-
cating its detection. Many individuals experience several episodes of major depression
prior to the first recognized hypomanic episode.
The number of lifetime episodes (both hypomanic and major depressive episodes)
tends to be higher for bipolar II disorder than for major depressive disorder or bipolar I
disorder. However, individuals with bipolar I disorder are actually more likely to experi-
ence hypomanic symptoms than are individuals with bipolar II disorder.The interval
between mood episodes in the course of bipolar II disorder tends to decrease as the indi-
vidual ages. While the hypomanic episode is the feature that defines bipolar II disorder,
depressive episodes are more enduring and disabling over time. Despite the predomi-
nance of depression, once a hypomanic episode has occurred, the diagnosis becomes bi-
polar II disorder and never reverts to major depressive disorder.
Approximately 5%–15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder have multiple (four or
more) mood episodes (hypomanic or major depressive) within the previous 12 months. If
Bipolar II Disorder 137
this pattern is present, it is noted by the specifier “with rapid cycling.” By definition, psy-
chotic symptoms do not occur in hypomanic episodes, and they appear to be less frequent
in the major depressive episodes in bipolar II disorder than in those of bipolar I disorder.
Switching from a depressive episode to a manic or hypomanic episode (with or with-
out mixed features) may occur, both spontaneously and during treatment for depression.
About 5%–15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder will ultimately develop a manic ep-
isode, which changes the diagnosis to bipolar I disorder, regardless of subsequent course.
Making the diagnosis in children is often a challenge, especially in those with irritabil-
ity and hyperarousal that is nonepisodic (i.e., lacks the well-demarcated periods of altered
mood). Nonepisodic irritability in youth is associated with an elevated risk for anxiety dis-
orders and major depressive disorder, but not bipolar disorder, in adulthood. Persistently
irritable youths have lower familial rates of bipolar disorder than do youths who have bi-
polar disorder. For a hypomanic episode to be diagnosed, the child’s symptoms must ex-
ceed what is expected in a given environment and culture for the child’s developmental
stage. Compared with adult onset of bipolar II disorder, childhood or adolescent onset of
the disorder may be associated with a more severe lifetime course. The 3-year incidence
rate of first-onset bipolar II disorder in adults older than 60 years is 0.34%. However, dis-
tinguishing individuals older than 60 years with bipolar II disorder by late versus early
age at onset does not appear to have any clinical utility.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. The risk of bipolar II disorder tends to be highest among rel-
atives of individuals with bipolar II disorder, as opposed to individuals with bipolar I dis-
order or major depressive disorder. There may be genetic factors influencing the age at
onset for bipolar disorders.
Course modifiers. A rapid-cycling pattern is associated with a poorer prognosis. Return
to previous level of social function for individuals with bipolar II disorder is more likely
for individuals of younger age and with less severe depression, suggesting adverse effects
of prolonged illness on recovery. More education, fewer years of illness, and being mar-
ried are independently associated with functional recovery in individuals with bipolar
disorder, even after diagnostic type (I vs. II), current depressive symptoms, and presence
of psychiatric comorbidity are taken into account.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Whereas the gender ratio for bipolar I disorder is equal, findings on gender differences in
bipolar II disorder are mixed, differing by type of sample (i.e., registry, community, or
clinical) and country of origin. There is little to no evidence of bipolar gender differences,
whereas some, but not all, clinical samples suggest that bipolar II disorder is more com-
mon in females than in males, which may reflect gender differences in treatment seeking
or other factors.
Patterns of illness and comorbidity, however, seem to differ by gender, with females
being more likely than males to report hypomania with mixed depressive features and a
rapid-cycling course. Childbirth may be a specific trigger for a hypomanic episode, which
can occur in 10%–20% of females in nonclinical populations and most typically in the early
postpartum period. Distinguishing hypomania from the elated mood and reduced sleep
that normally accompany the birth of a child may be challenging. Postpartum hypomania
may foreshadow the onset of a depression that occurs in about half of females who expe-
rience postpartum “highs.” Accurate detection of bipolar II disorder may help in estab-
lishing appropriate treatment of the depression, which may reduce the risk of suicide and
infanticide.
138 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Suicide Risk
Suicide risk is high in bipolar II disorder. Approximately one-third of individuals with bi-
polar II disorder report a lifetime history of suicide attempt. The prevalence rates of life-
time attempted suicide in bipolar II and bipolar I disorder appear to be similar (32.4% and
36.3%, respectively). However, the lethality of attempts, as defined by a lower ratio of at-
tempts to completed suicides, may be higher in individuals with bipolar II disorder com-
pared with individuals with bipolar I disorder. There may be an association between
genetic markers and increased risk for suicidal behavior in individuals with bipolar dis-
order, including a 6.5-fold higher risk of suicide among first-degree relatives of bipolar II
probands compared with those with bipolar I disorder.
Functional Consequences of Bipolar II Disorder
Although many individuals with bipolar II disorder return to a fully functional level be-
tween mood episodes, at least 15% continue to have some inter-episode dysfunction, and
20% transition directly into another mood episode without inter-episode recovery. Func-
tional recovery lags substantially behind recovery from symptoms of bipolar II disorder,
especially in regard to occupational recovery, resulting in lower socioeconomic status de-
spite equivalent levels of education with the general population. Individuals with bipolar
II disorder perform more poorly than healthy individuals on cognitive tests and, with the
exception of memory and semantic fluency, have similar cognitive impairment as do in-
dividuals with bipolar I disorder. Cognitive impairments associated with bipolar II disor-
der may contribute to vocational difficulties. Prolonged unemployment in individuals
with bipolar disorder is associated with more episodes of depression, older age, increased
rates of current panic disorder, and lifetime history of alcohol use disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive disorder. Perhaps the most challenging differential diagnosis to con-
sider is major depressive disorder, which may be accompanied by hypomanic or manic
symptoms that do not meet full criteria (i.e., either fewer symptoms or a shorter duration
than required for a hypomanic episode). This is especially true in evaluating individuals
with symptoms of irritability, which may be associated with either major depressive dis-
order or bipolar II disorder.
Cyclothymic disorder. In cyclothymic disorder, there are numerous periods of hypo-
manic symptoms and numerous periods of depressive symptoms that do not meet symp-
tom or duration criteria for a major depressive episode. Bipolar II disorder is distinguished
from cyclothymic disorder by the presence of one or more major depressive episodes. If a
major depressive episode occurs after the first 2 years of cyclothymic disorder, the addi-
tional diagnosis of bipolar II disorder is given.
Schizophrenia spectrum and other related psychotic disorders. Bipolar II disorder must
be distinguished from psychotic disorders (e.g., schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia,
and delusional disorder). Schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and delusional disor-
der are all characterized by periods of psychotic symptoms that occur in the absence of
prominent mood symptoms. Other helpful considerations include the accompanying
symptoms, previous course, and family history.
Panic disorder or other anxiety disorders. Anxiety disorders need to be considered in
the differential diagnosis and may frequently be present as co-occurring disorders.
Substance use disorders. Substance use disorders are included in the differential diag-
nosis.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
may be misdiagnosed as bipolar II disorder, especially in adolescents and children. Many
Cyclothymic Disorder 139
symptoms of ADHD, such as rapid speech, racing thoughts, distractibility, and less need
for sleep, overlap with the symptoms of hypomania. The double counting of symptoms to-
ward both ADHD and bipolar II disorder can be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether
the symptoms represent a distinct episode and if the noticeable increase over baseline re-
quired for the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder is present.
Personality disorders. The same convention as applies for ADHD also applies when
evaluating an individual for a personality disorder such as borderline personality disor-
der, since mood lability and impulsivity are common in both personality disorders and bi-
polar II disorder. Symptoms must represent a distinct episode, and the noticeable increase
over baseline required for the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder must be present. A diagnosis
of a personality disorder should not be made during an untreated mood episode unless
the lifetime history supports the presence of a personality disorder.
Other bipolar disorders. Diagnosis of bipolar II disorder should be differentiated from
bipolar I disorder by carefully considering whether there have been any past episodes of
mania and from other specified and unspecified bipolar and related disorders by confirm-
ing the presence of fully syndromal hypomania and depression.
Comorbidity
Bipolar II disorder is more often than not associated with one or more co-occurring mental
disorders, with anxiety disorders being the most common. Approximately 60% of individ-
uals with bipolar II disorder have three or more co-occurring mental disorders; 75% have
an anxiety disorder; and 37% have a substance use disorder. Children and adolescents
with bipolar II disorder have a higher rate of co-occurring anxiety disorders compared
with those with bipolar I disorder, and the anxiety disorder most often predates the bi-
polar disorder. Anxiety and substance use disorders occur in individuals with bipolar II
disorder at a higher rate than in the general population. Approximately 14% of individuals
with bipolar II disorder have at least one lifetime eating disorder, with binge-eating dis-
order being more common than bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa.
These commonly co-occurring disorders do not seem to follow a course of illness that
is truly independent from that of the bipolar disorder, but rather have strong associations
with mood states. For example, anxiety and eating disorders tend to associate most with
depressive symptoms, and substance use disorders are moderately associated with manic
symptoms.
Cyclothymic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.13 (F34.0)
A. For at least 2 years (at least 1 year in children and adolescents) there have been nu-
merous periods with hypomanic symptoms that do not meet criteria for a hypomanic
episode and numerous periods with depressive symptoms that do not meet criteria for
a major depressive episode.
B. During the above 2-year period (1 year in children and adolescents), the hypomanic
and depressive periods have been present for at least half the time and the individual
has not been without the symptoms for more than 2 months at a time.
C. Criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode have never been met.
D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not better explained by schizoaffective disorder,
schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified or un-
specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
140 Bipolar and Related Disorders
F. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With anxious distress (see p. 149)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of cyclothymic disorder is a chronic, fluctuating mood disturbance
involving numerous periods of hypomanic symptoms and periods of depressive symp-
toms that are distinct from each other (Criterion A). The hypomanic symptoms are of
insufficient number, severity, pervasiveness, or duration to meet full criteria for a hypo-
manic episode, and the depressive symptoms are of insufficient number, severity, perva-
siveness, or duration to meet full criteria for a major depressive episode. During the initial
2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents), the symptoms must be persistent (pres-
ent more days than not), and any symptom-free intervals last no longer than 2 months
(Criterion B). The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is made only if the criteria for a major
depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode have never been met (Criterion C).
If an individual with cyclothymic disorder subsequently (i.e., after the initial 2 years in
adults or 1 year in children or adolescents) experiences a major depressive, manic, or hy-
pomanic episode, the diagnosis changes to major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder,
or other specified or unspecified bipolar and related disorder (subclassified as hypomanic
episode without prior major depressive episode), respectively, and the cyclothymic disor-
der diagnosis is dropped.
The cyclothymic disorder diagnosis is not made if the pattern of mood swings is better
explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delu-
sional disorder, or other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorders (Criterion D), in which case the mood symptoms are considered asso-
ciated features of the psychotic disorder. The mood disturbance must also not be attribut-
able to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or
another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism) (Criterion E). Although some individ-
uals may function particularly well during some of the periods of hypomania, over the
prolonged course of the disorder, there must be clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning as a result of the
mood disturbance (Criterion F). The impairment may develop as a result of prolonged pe-
riods of cyclical, often unpredictable mood changes (e.g., the individual may be regarded
as temperamental, moody, unpredictable, inconsistent, or unreliable).
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of cyclothymic disorder is approximately 0.4%–1%. Prevalence in
mood disorders clinics may range from 3% to 5%. In the general population, cyclothymic
disorder is apparently equally common in males and females. In clinical settings, females
with cyclothymic disorder may be more likely to present for treatment than males.
Development and Course
Cyclothymic disorder usually begins in adolescence or early adult life and is sometimes
considered to reflect a temperamental predisposition to other disorders in this chapter.
Cyclothymic disorder usually has an insidious onset and a persistent course. There is a
15%–50% risk that an individual with cyclothymic disorder will subsequently develop bi-
polar I disorder or bipolar II disorder. Onset of persistent, fluctuating hypomanic and de-
pressive symptoms late in adult life needs to be clearly differentiated from bipolar and
Cyclothymic Disorder 141
related disorder due to another medical condition and depressive disorder due to another
medical condition (e.g., multiple sclerosis) before the cyclothymic disorder diagnosis is as-
signed. Among children with cyclothymic disorder, the mean age at onset of symptoms is
6.5 years of age.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder, and bipolar II
disorder are more common among first-degree biological relatives of individuals with cyclo-
thymic disorder than in the general population. There may also be an increased familial risk of
substance-related disorders. Cyclothymic disorder may be more common in the first-degree
biological relatives of individuals with bipolar I disorder than in the general population.
Differential Diagnosis
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition and depressive disorder
due to another medical condition. The diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to
another medical condition or depressive disorder due to another medical condition is
made when the mood disturbance is judged to be attributable to the physiological effect of
a specific, usually chronic medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism). This determination
is based on the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings. If it is judged that the
hypomanic and depressive symptoms are not the physiological consequence of the med-
ical condition, then the primary mental disorder (i.e., cyclothymic disorder) and the med-
ical condition are coded. For example, this would be the case if the mood symptoms are
considered to be the psychological (not the physiological) consequence of having a chronic
medical condition, or if there is no etiological relationship between the hypomanic and de-
pressive symptoms and the medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and substance/medica-
tion-induced depressive disorder. Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related
disorder and substance/medication-induced depressive disorder are distinguished from
cyclothymic disorder by the judgment that a substance/medication (especially stimu-
lants) is etiologically related to the mood disturbance. The frequent mood swings in these
disorders that are suggestive of cyclothymic disorder usually resolve following cessation
of substance/medication use.
Bipolar I disorder, with rapid cycling, and bipolar II disorder, with rapid cycling.
Both disorders may resemble cyclothymic disorder by virtue of the frequent marked shifts
in mood. By definition, in cyclothymic disorder the criteria for a major depressive, manic,
or hypomanic episode has never been met, whereas the bipolar I disorder and bipolar II
disorder specifier “with rapid cycling” requires that full mood episodes be present.
Borderline personality disorder. Borderline personality disorder is associated with
marked shifts in mood that may suggest cyclothymic disorder. If the criteria are met for
both disorders, both borderline personality disorder and cyclothymic disorder may be di-
agnosed.
Comorbidity
Substance-related disorders and sleep disorders (i.e., difficulties in initiating and main-
taining sleep) may be present in individuals with cyclothymic disorder. Most children
with cyclothymic disorder treated in outpatient psychiatric settings have comorbid mental
conditions; they are more likely than other pediatric patients with mental disorders to
have comorbid attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
142 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Substance/Medication-Induced
Bipolar and Related Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. B. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture
and is characterized by elevated, expansive, or irritable mood, with or without depressed
mood, or markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
(1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite-
rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a bipolar or related disorder that is not sub-
stance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent bipolar or related disor-
der could include the following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms per-
sist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute
withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the existence
of an independent non-substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder
(e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medication]-
induced bipolar and related disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-
CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-
induced bipolar and related disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should
record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced bipolar and related dis-
order (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder”). If a
moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced bipolar
and related disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moder-
ate [substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity
of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g.,
after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the
clinician should record only the substance-induced bipolar and related disorder.
ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CM
With use
disorder,
mild
With use
disorder,
moderate
or severe
Without
use
disorder
Alcohol 291.89 F10.14 F10.24 F10.94
Phencyclidine 292.84 F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
Other hallucinogen 292.84 F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
Substance/Medication-Induced Bipolar and Related Disorder 143
ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CM
With use
disorder,
mild
With use
disorder,
moderate
or severe
Without
use
disorder
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic 292.84 F13.14 F13.24 F13.94
Amphetamine (or other
292.84 F15.14 F15.24 F15.94
stimulant)
Cocaine 292.84 F14.14 F14.24 F14.94
Other (or unknown) substance 292.84 F19.14 F19.24 F19.94
Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for di-
agnoses associated with substance class):
With onset during intoxication: If the criteria are met for intoxication with the sub-
stance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the substance
and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disor-
der begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to
be causing the bipolar mood symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table in-
cluded in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit
into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other substance” should be
used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during withdrawal). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM,
which combine the substance-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a single
code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder. For
example, in the case of irritable symptoms occurring during intoxication in a man with a
severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.84 cocaine-induced bipolar and related
disorder, with onset during intoxication. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine
use disorder is also given. When more than one substance is judged to play a significant
role in the development of bipolar mood symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g.,
292.84 methylphenidate-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxi-
cation; 292.84 dexamethasone-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during in-
toxication).
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disor-
der begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, dexamethasone) that is presumed to
be causing the bipolar mood symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table in-
cluded in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a co-
morbid substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g.,
dexamethasone), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a
substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is un-
known, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any)
is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
144 Bipolar and Related Disorders
bipolar and related disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during withdrawal). For example, in the case of irritable symptoms oc-
curring during intoxication in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is
F14.24 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder,
with onset during intoxication. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use
disorder is not given. If the substance-induced bipolar and related disorder occurs without
a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no
accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.94 amphetamine-induced bipolar
and related disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than one substance is
judged to play a significant role in the development of bipolar mood symptoms, each
should be listed separately (e.g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use disorder with meth-
ylphenidate-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication; F19.94
dexamethasone-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication).
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic features of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder are es-
sentially the same as those for mania, hypomania, or depression. A key exception to the diag-
nosis of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder is the case of hypomania
or mania that occurs after antidepressant medication use or other treatments and persists be-
yond the physiological effects of the medication. This condition is considered an indicator of
true bipolar disorder, not substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder. Simi-
larly, individuals with apparent electroconvulsive therapy–induced manic or hypomanic ep-
isodes that persist beyond the physiological effects of the treatment are diagnosed with
bipolar disorder, not substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder.
Side effects of some antidepressants and other psychotropic drugs (e.g., edginess, ag-
itation) may resemble the primary symptoms of a manic syndrome, but they are funda-
mentally distinct from bipolar symptoms and are insufficient for the diagnosis. That is, the
criterion symptoms of mania/hypomania have specificity (simple agitation is not the same
as excess involvement in purposeful activities), and a sufficient number of symptoms
must be present (not just one or two symptoms) to make these diagnoses. In particular, the
appearance of one or two nonspecific symptoms—irritability, edginess, or agitation during
antidepressant treatment—in the absence of a full manic or hypomanic syndrome should
not be taken to support a diagnosis of a bipolar disorder.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Etiology (causally related to the use of psychotropic medications or substances of abuse
based on best clinical evidence) is the key variable in this etiologically specified form of bi-
polar disorder. Substances/medications that are typically considered to be associated
with substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder include the stimulant
class of drugs, as well as phencyclidine and steroids; however, a number of potential sub-
stances continue to emerge as new compounds are synthesized (e.g., so-called bath salts).
A history of such substance use may help increase diagnostic certainty.
Prevalence
There are no epidemiological studies of substance/medication-induced mania or bipolar
disorder. Each etiological substance may have its own individual risk of inducing a bipo-
lar (manic/hypomanic) disorder.
Development and Course
In phencyclidine-induced mania, the initial presentation may be one of a delirium with af-
fective features, which then becomes an atypically appearing manic or mixed manic state.
Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 145
This condition follows the ingestion or inhalation quickly, usually within hours or, at the
most, a few days. In stimulant-induced manic or hypomanic states, the response is in min-
utes to 1 hour after one or several ingestions or injections. The episode is very brief and
typically resolves over 1–2 days. With corticosteroids and some immunosuppressant
medications, the mania (or mixed or depressed state) usually follows several days of in-
gestion, and the higher doses appear to have a much greater likelihood of producing bi-
polar symptoms.
Diagnostic Markers
Determination of the substance of use can be made through markers in the blood or urine
to corroborate diagnosis.
Differential Diagnosis
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder should be differentiated
from other bipolar disorders, substance intoxication or substance-induced delirium, and
medication side effects (as noted earlier). A full manic episode that emerges during anti-
depressant treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully
syndromal level beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for
a bipolar I diagnosis. A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treat-
ment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level
beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a bipolar II di-
agnosis only if preceded by a major depressive episode.
Comorbidity
Comorbidities are those associated with the use of illicit substances (in the case of illegal
stimulants or phencyclidine) or diversion of prescribed stimulants. Comorbidities related
to steroid or immunosuppressant medications are those medical indications for these
preparations. Delirium can occur before or along with manic symptoms in individuals in-
gesting phencyclidine or those who are prescribed steroid medications or other immuno-
suppressant medications.
Bipolar and Related Disorder
Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally increased activity or energy that predominates in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the dis-
turbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning, or necessitates hospitalization to pre-
vent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for bipolar and related disorder due to another medical
condition is 293.83, which is assigned regardless of the specifier. The ICD-10-CM code
depends on the specifier (see below).
146 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Specify if:
(F06.33) With manic features: Full criteria are not met for a manic or hypomanic ep-
isode.
(F06.33) With manic- or hypomanic-like episode: Full criteria are met except Crite-
rion D for a manic episode or except Criterion F for a hypomanic episode.
(F06.34) With mixed features: Symptoms of depression are also present but do not
predominate in the clinical picture.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental
disorder (e.g., 293.83 [F06.33] bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with manic fea-
tures). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed separately immedi-
ately before the bipolar and related disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 242.90
[E05.90] hyperthyroidism; 293.83 [F06.33] bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with
manic features).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition are
presence of a prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irri-
table mood and abnormally increased activity or energy predominating in the clinical pic-
ture that is attributable to another medical condition (Criterion B). In most cases the manic
or hypomanic picture may appear during the initial presentation of the medical condition
(i.e., within 1 month); however, there are exceptions, especially in chronic medical condi-
tions that might worsen or relapse and herald the appearance of the manic or hypomanic
picture. Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition would not be diag-
nosed when the manic or hypomanic episodes definitely preceded the medical condition,
since the proper diagnosis would be bipolar disorder (except in the unusual circumstance
in which all preceding manic or hypomanic episodes—or, when only one such episode has
occurred, the preceding manic or hypomanic episode—were associated with ingestion of
a substance/medication). The diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to another
medical condition should not be made during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The
manic or hypomanic episode in bipolar and related disorder due to another medical con-
dition must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning to qualify for this diagnosis (Criterion E).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Etiology (i.e., a causal relationship to another medical condition based on best clinical ev-
idence) is the key variable in this etiologically specified form of bipolar disorder. The list-
ing of medical conditions that are said to be able to induce mania is never complete, and
the clinician’s best judgment is the essence of this diagnosis. Among the best known of the
medical conditions that can cause a bipolar manic or hypomanic condition are Cushing’s
disease and multiple sclerosis, as well as stroke and traumatic brain injuries.
Development and Course
Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition usually has its onset acutely
or subacutely within the first weeks or month of the onset of the associated medical con-
dition. However, this is not always the case, as a worsening or later relapse of the associ-
ated medical condition may precede the onset of the manic or hypomanic syndrome. The
clinician must make a clinical judgment in these situations about whether the medical con-
dition is causative, based on temporal sequence as well as plausibility of a causal relation-
Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 147
ship. Finally, the condition may remit before or just after the medical condition remits,
particularly when treatment of the manic/hypomanic symptoms is effective.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Culture-related differences, to the extent that there is any evidence, pertain to those asso-
ciated with the medical condition (e.g., rates of multiple sclerosis and stroke vary around
the world based on dietary, genetic factors, and other environmental factors).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender differences pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., systemic
lupus erythematosus is more common in females; stroke is somewhat more common in
middle-age males compared with females).
Diagnostic Markers
Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid
levels in blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can
be associated with manic or depressive syndromes; laboratory tests confirming the diag-
nosis of multiple sclerosis).
Functional Consequences of Bipolar and Related
Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition
Functional consequences of the bipolar symptoms may exacerbate impairments associ-
ated with the medical condition and may incur worse outcomes due to interference with
medical treatment. In general, it is believed, but not established, that the illness, when in-
duced by Cushing’s disease, will not recur if the Cushing’s disease is cured or arrested.
However, it is also suggested, but not established, that mood syndromes, including de-
pressive and manic/hypomanic ones, may be episodic (i.e., recurring) with static brain in-
juries and other central nervous system diseases.
Differential Diagnosis
Symptoms of delirium, catatonia, and acute anxiety. It is important to differentiate
symptoms of mania from excited or hypervigilant delirious symptoms; from excited cata-
tonic symptoms; and from agitation related to acute anxiety states.
Medication-induced depressive or manic symptoms. An important differential diag-
nostic observation is that the other medical condition may be treated with medications
(e.g., steroids or alpha-interferon) that can induce depressive or manic symptoms. In these
cases, clinical judgment using all of the evidence in hand is the best way to try to separate
the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e., association with
the medical condition vs. a substance/medication-induced syndrome). The differential di-
agnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but largely beyond the scope of the
present manual.
Comorbidity
Conditions comorbid with bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition
are those associated with the medical conditions of etiological relevance. Delirium can oc-
cur before or along with manic symptoms in individuals with Cushing’s disease.
148 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Other Specified Bipolar and Related Disorder
296.89 (F31.89)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a bipolar and
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any of the disorders in the bipolar and related disorders diagnostic class. The other
specified bipolar and related disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician
chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the cri-
teria for any specific bipolar and related disorder. This is done by recording “other speci-
fied bipolar and related disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “short-duration
cyclothymia”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1. Short-duration hypomanic episodes (2–3 days) and major depressive episodes: A
lifetime history of one or more major depressive episodes in individuals whose presenta-
tion has never met full criteria for a manic or hypomanic episode but who have experienced
two or more episodes of short-duration hypomania that meet the full symptomatic criteria
for a hypomanic episode but that only last for 2–3 days. The episodes of hypomanic symp-
toms do not overlap in time with the major depressive episodes, so the disturbance does
not meet criteria for major depressive episode, with mixed features.
2. Hypomanic episodes with insufficient symptoms and major depressive epi-
sodes: A lifetime history of one or more major depressive episodes in individuals
whose presentation has never met full criteria for a manic or hypomanic episode but
who have experienced one or more episodes of hypomania that do not meet full symp-
tomatic criteria (i.e., at least 4 consecutive days of elevated mood and one or two of
the other symptoms of a hypomanic episode, or irritable mood and two or three of the
other symptoms of a hypomanic episode). The episodes of hypomanic symptoms do
not overlap in time with the major depressive episodes, so the disturbance does not
meet criteria for major depressive episode, with mixed features.
3. Hypomanic episode without prior major depressive episode: One or more hypo-
manic episodes in an individual whose presentation has never met full criteria for a ma-
jor depressive episode or a manic episode. If this occurs in an individual with an
established diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), both diagnoses
can be concurrently applied during the periods when the full criteria for a hypomanic
episode are met.
4. Short-duration cyclothymia (less than 24 months): Multiple episodes of hypomanic
symptoms that do not meet criteria for a hypomanic episode and multiple episodes of de-
pressive symptoms that do not meet criteria for a major depressive episode that persist
over a period of less than 24 months (less than 12 months for children or adolescents)
in an individual whose presentation has never met full criteria for a major depressive,
manic, or hypomanic episode and does not meet criteria for any psychotic disorder. Dur-
ing the course of the disorder, the hypomanic or depressive symptoms are present for
more days than not, the individual has not been without symptoms for more than 2 months
at a time, and the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment.
Unspecified Bipolar and Related Disorder 149
Unspecified Bipolar and Related Disorder
296.80 (F31.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a bipolar and
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any of the disorders in the bipolar and related disorders diagnostic class. The unspec-
ified bipolar and related disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician choos-
es not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific bipolar and related
disorder, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a
more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Specifiers for Bipolar and Related Disorders
Specify if:
With anxious distress: The presence of at least two of the following symptoms during
the majority of days of the current or most recent episode of mania, hypomania, or de-
pression:
1. Feeling keyed up or tense.
2. Feeling unusually restless.
3. Difficulty concentrating because of worry.
4. Fear that something awful may happen.
5. Feeling that the individual might lose control of himself or herself.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Two symptoms.
Moderate: Three symptoms.
Moderate-severe: Four or five symptoms.
Severe: Four or five symptoms with motor agitation.
Note: Anxious distress has been noted as a prominent feature of both bipolar and
major depressive disorder in both primary care and specialty mental health set-
tings. High levels of anxiety have been associated with higher suicide risk, longer
duration of illness, and greater likelihood of treatment nonresponse. As a result, it
is clinically useful to specify accurately the presence and severity levels of anxious
distress for treatment planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With mixed features: The mixed features specifier can apply to the current manic, hy-
pomanic, or depressive episode in bipolar I or bipolar II disorder:
Manic or hypomanic episode, with mixed features:
A. Full criteria are met for a manic episode or hypomanic episode, and at least
three of the following symptoms are present during the majority of days of the
current or most recent episode of mania or hypomania:
1. Prominent dysphoria or depressed mood as indicated by either subjective
report (e.g., feels sad or empty) or observation made by others (e.g., ap-
pears tearful).
2. Diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities (as indicated by
either subjective account or observation made by others).
3. Psychomotor retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not merely
subjective feelings of being slowed down).
150 Bipolar and Related Disorders
4. Fatigue or loss of energy.
5. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (not merely
self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
6. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ide-
ation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for com-
mitting suicide.
B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
person’s usual behavior.
C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full episode criteria for both mania and
depression simultaneously, the diagnosis should be manic episode, with mixed
features, due to the marked impairment and clinical severity of full mania.
D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub-
stance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment).
Depressive episode, with mixed features:
A. Full criteria are met for a major depressive episode, and at least three of the fol-
lowing manic/hypomanic symptoms are present during the majority of days of
the current or most recent episode of depression:
1. Elevated, expansive mood.
2. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Increase in energy or goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school,
or sexually).
6. Increased or excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential
for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees,
sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
7. Decreased need for sleep (feeling rested despite sleeping less than usual;
to be contrasted with insomnia).
B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
person’s usual behavior.
C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full episode criteria for both mania and
depression simultaneously, the diagnosis should be manic episode, with mixed
features.
D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub-
stance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or other treatment).
Note: Mixed features associated with a major depressive episode have been found
to be a significant risk factor for the development of bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
As a result, it is clinically useful to note the presence of this specifier for treatment
planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With rapid cycling (can be applied to bipolar I or bipolar II disorder): Presence of at
least four mood episodes in the previous 12 months that meet the criteria for manic,
hypomanic, or major depressive episode.
Note: Episodes are demarcated by either partial or full remissions of at least 2 months
or a switch to an episode of the opposite polarity (e.g., major depressive episode to
manic episode).
Note: The essential feature of a rapid-cycling bipolar disorder is the occurrence of
at least four mood episodes during the previous 12 months. These episodes can
occur in any combination and order. The episodes must meet both the duration and
Specifiers for Bipolar and Related Disorders 151
symptom number criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode and
must be demarcated by either a period of full remission or a switch to an episode
of the opposite polarity. Manic and hypomanic episodes are counted as being on
the same pole. Except for the fact that they occur more frequently, the episodes that
occur in a rapid-cycling pattern are no different from those that occur in a non-rapid-
cycling pattern. Mood episodes that count toward defining a rapid-cycling pattern
exclude those episodes directly caused by a substance (e.g., cocaine, corticoste-
roids) or another medical condition.
With melancholic features:
A. One of the following is present during the most severe period of the current episode:
1. Loss of pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
2. Lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (does not feel much better, even
temporarily, when something good happens).
B. Three (or more) of the following:
1. A distinct quality of depressed mood characterized by profound despondency,
despair, and/or moroseness or by so-called empty mood.
2. Depression that is regularly worse in the morning.
3. Early-morning awakening (i.e., at least 2 hours before usual awakening).
4. Marked psychomotor agitation or retardation.
5. Significant anorexia or weight loss.
6. Excessive or inappropriate guilt.
Note: The specifier “with melancholic features” is applied if these features are pres-
ent at the most severe stage of the episode. There is a near-complete absence of
the capacity for pleasure, not merely a diminution. A guideline for evaluating the
lack of reactivity of mood is that even highly desired events are not associated with
marked brightening of mood. Either mood does not brighten at all, or it brightens
only partially (e.g., up to 20%–40% of normal for only minutes at a time). The “dis-
tinct quality” of mood that is characteristic of the “with melancholic features” speci-
fier is experienced as qualitatively different from that during a nonmelancholic
depressive episode. A depressed mood that is described as merely more severe,
longer lasting, or present without a reason is not considered distinct in quality. Psy-
chomotor changes are nearly always present and are observable by others.
Melancholic features exhibit only a modest tendency to repeat across episodes
in the same individual. They are more frequent in inpatients, as opposed to outpa-
tients; are less likely to occur in milder than in more severe major depressive epi-
sodes; and are more likely to occur in those with psychotic features.
With atypical features: This specifier can be applied when these features predomi-
nate during the majority of days of the current or most recent major depressive epi-
sode.
A. Mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in response to actual or potential positive
events).
B. Two (or more) of the following features:
1. Significant weight gain or increase in appetite.
2. Hypersomnia.
3. Leaden paralysis (i.e., heavy, leaden feelings in arms or legs).
4. A long-standing pattern of interpersonal rejection sensitivity (not limited to epi-
sodes of mood disturbance) that results in significant social or occupational
impairment.
152 Bipolar and Related Disorders
C. Criteria are not met for “with melancholic features” or “with catatonia” during the
same episode.
Note: “Atypical depression” has historical significance (i.e., atypical in contradis-
tinction to the more classical agitated, “endogenous” presentations of depression
that were the norm when depression was rarely diagnosed in outpatients and al-
most never in adolescents or younger adults) and today does not connote an un-
common or unusual clinical presentation as the term might imply.
Mood reactivity is the capacity to be cheered up when presented with positive
events (e.g., a visit from children, compliments from others). Mood may become
euthymic (not sad) even for extended periods of time if the external circumstances
remain favorable. Increased appetite may be manifested by an obvious increase in
food intake or by weight gain. Hypersomnia may include either an extended period
of nighttime sleep or daytime napping that totals at least 10 hours of sleep per day
(or at least 2 hours more than when not depressed). Leaden paralysis is defined as
feeling heavy, leaden, or weighted down, usually in the arms or legs. This sensation
is generally present for at least an hour a day but often lasts for many hours at a
time. Unlike the other atypical features, pathological sensitivity to perceived inter-
personal rejection is a trait that has an early onset and persists throughout most of
adult life. Rejection sensitivity occurs both when the person is and is not depressed,
though it may be exacerbated during depressive periods.
With psychotic features: Delusions or hallucinations are present at any time in the
episode. If psychotic features are present, specify if mood-congruent or mood-incon-
gruent:
With mood-congruent psychotic features: During manic episodes, the con-
tent of all delusions and hallucinations is consistent with the typical manic
themes of grandiosity, invulnerability, etc., but may also include themes of sus-
piciousness or paranoia, especially with respect to others’ doubts about the in-
dividual’s capacities, accomplishments, and so forth.
With mood-incongruent psychotic features: The content of delusions and
hallucinations is inconsistent with the episode polarity themes as described
above, or the content is a mixture of mood-incongruent and mood-congruent
themes.
With catatonia: This specifier can apply to an episode of mania or depression if cata-
tonic features are present during most of the episode. See criteria for catatonia asso-
ciated with a mental disorder in the chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other
Psychotic Disorders.”
With peripartum onset: This specifier can be applied to the current or, if the full crite-
ria are not currently met for a mood episode, most recent episode of mania, hypoma-
nia, or major depression in bipolar I or bipolar II disorder if onset of mood symptoms
occurs during pregnancy or in the 4 weeks following delivery.
Note: Mood episodes can have their onset either during pregnancy or postpartum.
Although the estimates differ according to the period of follow-up after delivery, be-
tween 3% and 6% of women will experience the onset of a major depressive epi-
sode during pregnancy or in the weeks or months following delivery. Fifty percent
of “postpartum” major depressive episodes actually begin prior to delivery. Thus,
these episodes are referred to collectively as peripartum episodes. Women with
peripartum major depressive episodes often have severe anxiety and even panic
attacks. Prospective studies have demonstrated that mood and anxiety symptoms
during pregnancy, as well as the “baby blues,” increase the risk for a postpartum
major depressive episode.
Specifiers for Bipolar and Related Disorders 153
Peripartum-onset mood episodes can present either with or without psychotic
features. Infanticide is most often associated with postpartum psychotic episodes
that are characterized by command hallucinations to kill the infant or delusions that
the infant is possessed, but psychotic symptoms can also occur in severe postpar-
tum mood episodes without such specific delusions or hallucinations.
Postpartum mood (major depressive or manic) episodes with psychotic features
appear to occur in from 1 in 500 to 1 in 1,000 deliveries and may be more common
in primiparous women. The risk of postpartum episodes with psychotic features is
particularly increased for women with prior postpartum mood episodes but is also
elevated for those with a prior history of a depressive or bipolar disorder (especially
bipolar I disorder) and those with a family history of bipolar disorders.
Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the risk
of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%. Postpartum
episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the postpartum period,
which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of awareness or attention. The postpar-
tum period is unique with respect to the degree of neuroendocrine alterations and
psychosocial adjustments, the potential impact of breast-feeding on treatment plan-
ning, and the long-term implications of a history of postpartum mood disorder on sub-
sequent family planning.
With seasonal pattern: This specifier applies to the lifetime pattern of mood episodes.
The essential feature is a regular seasonal pattern of at least one type of episode (i.e.,
mania, hypomania, or depression). The other types of episodes may not follow this pat-
tern. For example, an individual may have seasonal manias, but his or her depressions
do not regularly occur at a specific time of year.
A. There has been a regular temporal relationship between the onset of manic, hypo-
manic, or major depressive episodes and a particular time of the year (e.g., in the
fall or winter) in bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
Note: Do not include cases in which there is an obvious effect of seasonally related
psychosocial stressors (e.g., regularly being unemployed every winter).
B. Full remissions (or a change from major depression to mania or hypomania or vice
versa) also occur at a characteristic time of the year (e.g., depression disappears
in the spring).
C. In the last 2 years, the individual’s manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episodes
have demonstrated a temporal seasonal relationship, as defined above, and no
non-seasonal episodes of that polarity have occurred during that 2-year period.
D. Seasonal manias, hypomanias, or depressions (as described above) substantially
outnumber any nonseasonal manias, hypomanias, or depressions that may have
occurred over the individual’s lifetime.
Note: This specifier can be applied to the pattern of major depressive episodes in
bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, or major depressive disorder, recurrent. The
essential feature is the onset and remission of major depressive episodes at char-
acteristic times of the year. In most cases, the episodes begin in fall or winter and
remit in spring. Less commonly, there may be recurrent summer depressive epi-
sodes. This pattern of onset and remission of episodes must have occurred during
at least a 2-year period, without any nonseasonal episodes occurring during this
period. In addition, the seasonal depressive episodes must substantially outnum-
ber any nonseasonal depressive episodes over the individual’s lifetime.
This specifier does not apply to those situations in which the pattern is better ex-
plained by seasonally linked psychosocial stressors (e.g., seasonal unemployment
or school schedule). Major depressive episodes that occur in a seasonal pattern
154 Bipolar and Related Disorders
are often characterized by prominent energy, hypersomnia, overeating, weight
gain, and a craving for carbohydrates. It is unclear whether a seasonal pattern is
more likely in recurrent major depressive disorder or in bipolar disorders. However,
within the bipolar disorders group, a seasonal pattern appears to be more likely in
bipolar II disorder than in bipolar I disorder. In some individuals, the onset of manic
or hypomanic episodes may also be linked to a particular season.
The prevalence of winter-type seasonal pattern appears to vary with latitude,
age, and sex. Prevalence increases with higher latitudes. Age is also a strong pre-
dictor of seasonality, with younger persons at higher risk for winter depressive epi-
sodes.
Specify if:
In partial remission: Symptoms of the immediately previous manic, hypomanic, or
depressive episode are present, but full criteria are not met, or there is a period lasting
less than 2 months without any significant symptoms of a manic, hypomanic, or major
depressive episode following the end of such an episode.
In full remission: During the past 2 months, no significant signs or symptoms of the
disturbance were present.
Specify current severity:
Severity is based on the number of criterion symptoms, the severity of those symptoms,
and the degree of functional disability.
Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to meet the diagnostic criteria
are present, the intensity of the symptoms is distressing but manageable, and the
symptoms result in minor impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Moderate: The number of symptoms, intensity of symptoms, and/or functional impair-
ment are between those specified for “mild” and “severe.”
Severe: The number of symptoms is substantially in excess of those required to make
the diagnosis, the intensity of the symptoms is seriously distressing and unmanage-
able, and the symptoms markedly interfere with social and occupational functioning.
Depressive
Disorders
Depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, major
depressive disorder (including major depressive episode), persistent depressive disorder
(dysthymia), premenstrual dysphoric disorder, substance/medication-induced depres-
sive disorder, depressive disorder due to another medical condition, other specified de-
pressive disorder, and unspecified depressive disorder. Unlike in DSM-IV, this chapter
“Depressive Disorders” has been separated from the previous chapter “Bipolar and Re-
lated Disorders.” The common feature of all of these disorders is the presence of sad,
empty, or irritable mood, accompanied by somatic and cognitive changes that signifi-
cantly affect the individual’s capacity to function. What differs among them are issues of
duration, timing, or presumed etiology.
In order to address concerns about the potential for the overdiagnosis of and treatment
for bipolar disorder in children, a new diagnosis, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
referring to the presentation of children with persistent irritability and frequent episodes
of extreme behavioral dyscontrol, is added to the depressive disorders for children up to
12 years of age. Its placement in this chapter reflects the finding that children with this
symptom pattern typically develop unipolar depressive disorders or anxiety disorders,
rather than bipolar disorders, as they mature into adolescence and adulthood.
Major depressive disorder represents the classic condition in this group of disorders. It
is characterized by discrete episodes of at least 2 weeks’ duration (although most episodes
last considerably longer) involving clear-cut changes in affect, cognition, and neurovege-
tative functions and inter-episode remissions. A diagnosis based on a single episode is
possible, although the disorder is a recurrent one in the majority of cases. Careful consid-
eration is given to the delineation of normal sadness and grief from a major depressive ep-
isode. Bereavement may induce great suffering, but it does not typically induce an episode
of major depressive disorder. When they do occur together, the depressive symptoms and
functional impairment tend to be more severe and the prognosis is worse compared with
bereavement that is not accompanied by major depressive disorder. Bereavement-related
depression tends to occur in persons with other vulnerabilities to depressive disorders,
and recovery may be facilitated by antidepressant treatment.
A more chronic form of depression, persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), can be
diagnosed when the mood disturbance continues for at least 2 years in adults or 1 year in
children. This diagnosis, new in DSM-5, includes both the DSM-IV diagnostic categories of
chronic major depression and dysthymia.
After careful scientific review of the evidence, premenstrual dysphoric disorder has
been moved from an appendix of DSM-IV (“Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further
Study”) to Section II of DSM-5. Almost 20 years of additional of research on this condition
has confirmed a specific and treatment-responsive form of depressive disorder that begins
sometime following ovulation and remits within a few days of menses and has a marked
impact on functioning.
A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medications, and several
medical conditions can be associated with depression-like phenomena. This fact is recog-
nized in the diagnoses of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder and depres-
sive disorder due to another medical condition.
155
156 Depressive Disorders
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 296.99 (F34.8)
A. Severe recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally (e.g., verbal rages) and/or be-
haviorally (e.g., physical aggression toward people or property) that are grossly out of
proportion in intensity or duration to the situation or provocation.
B. The temper outbursts are inconsistent with developmental level.
C. The temper outbursts occur, on average, three or more times per week.
D. The mood between temper outbursts is persistently irritable or angry most of the day,
nearly every day, and is observable by others (e.g., parents, teachers, peers).
E. Criteria A–D have been present for 12 or more months. Throughout that time, the indi-
vidual has not had a period lasting 3 or more consecutive months without all of the
symptoms in Criteria A–D.
F. Criteria A and D are present in at least two of three settings (i.e., at home, at school,
with peers) and are severe in at least one of these.
G. The diagnosis should not be made for the first time before age 6 years or after age 18
years.
H. By history or observation, the age at onset of Criteria A–E is before 10 years.
I. There has never been a distinct period lasting more than 1 day during which the full
symptom criteria, except duration, for a manic or hypomanic episode have been met.
Note: Developmentally appropriate mood elevation, such as occurs in the context of a
highly positive event or its anticipation, should not be considered as a symptom of ma-
nia or hypomania.
J. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during an episode of major depressive disorder
and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., autism spectrum disor-
der, posttraumatic stress disorder, separation anxiety disorder, persistent depressive
disorder [dysthymia]).
Note: This diagnosis cannot coexist with oppositional defiant disorder, intermittent ex-
plosive disorder, or bipolar disorder, though it can coexist with others, including major
depressive disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, and
substance use disorders. Individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for both disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder and oppositional defiant disorder should only be given the
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. If an individual has ever experi-
enced a manic or hypomanic episode, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder should not be assigned.
K. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or to an-
other medical or neurological condition.
Diagnostic Features
The core feature of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is chronic, severe persistent ir-
ritability. This severe irritability has two prominent clinical manifestations, the first of
which is frequent temper outbursts. These outbursts typically occur in response to frus-
tration and can be verbal or behavioral (the latter in the form of aggression against prop-
erty, self, or others). They must occur frequently (i.e., on average, three or more times per
week) (Criterion C) over at least 1 year in at least two settings (Criteria E and F), such as in
the home and at school, and they must be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B).
The second manifestation of severe irritability consists of chronic, persistently irritable or
angry mood that is present between the severe temper outbursts. This irritable or angry
mood must be characteristic of the child, being present most of the day, nearly every day,
and noticeable by others in the child’s environment (Criterion D).
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder 157
The clinical presentation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be carefully
distinguished from presentations of other, related conditions, particularly pediatric bi-
polar disorder. In fact, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder was added to DSM-5 to
address the considerable concern about the appropriate classification and treatment of
children who present with chronic, persistent irritability relative to children who present
with classic (i.e., episodic) bipolar disorder.
Some researchers view severe, non-episodic irritability as characteristic of bipolar dis-
order in children, although both DSM-IV and DSM-5 require that both children and adults
have distinct episodes of mania or hypomania to qualify for the diagnosis of bipolar I dis-
order. During the latter decades of the 20th century, this contention by researchers that
severe, nonepisodic irritability is a manifestation of pediatric mania coincided with an up-
surge in the rates at which clinicians assigned the diagnosis of bipolar disorder to their
pediatric patients. This sharp increase in rates appears to be attributable to clinicians com-
bining at least two clinical presentations into a single category. That is, both classic, epi-
sodic presentations of mania and non-episodic presentations of severe irritability have
been labeled as bipolar disorder in children. In DSM-5, the term bipolar disorder is explicitly
reserved for episodic presentations of bipolar symptoms. DSM-IV did not include a diagno-
sis designed to capture youths whose hallmark symptoms consisted of very severe, non-
episodic irritability, whereas DSM-5, with the inclusion of disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder, provides a distinct category for such presentations.
Prevalence
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is common among children presenting to pedi-
atric mental health clinics. Prevalence estimates of the disorder in the community are un-
clear. Based on rates of chronic and severe persistent irritability, which is the core feature
of the disorder, the overall 6-month to 1-year period-prevalence of disruptive mood dys-
regulation disorder among children and adolescents probably falls in the 2%–5% range.
However, rates are expected to be higher in males and school-age children than in females
and adolescents.
Development and Course
The onset of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be before age 10 years, and the
diagnosis should not be applied to children with a developmental age of less than 6 years.
It is unknown whether the condition presents only in this age-delimited fashion. Because
the symptoms of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are likely to change as children
mature, use of the diagnosis should be restricted to age groups similar to those in which
validity has been established (7–18 years). Approximately half of children with severe,
chronic irritability will have a presentation that continues to meet criteria for the condition
1 year later. Rates of conversion from severe, nonepisodic irritability to bipolar disorder
are very low. Instead, children with chronic irritability are at risk to develop unipolar de-
pressive and/or anxiety disorders in adulthood.
Age-related variations also differentiate classic bipolar disorder and disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder. Rates of bipolar disorder generally are very low prior to adoles-
cence (<1%), with a steady increase into early adulthood (1%–2% prevalence). Disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder is more common than bipolar disorder prior to adolescence,
and symptoms of the condition generally become less common as children transition into
adulthood.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Children with chronic irritability typically exhibit complicated psy-
chiatric histories. In such children, a relatively extensive history of chronic irritability is
158 Depressive Disorders
common, typically manifesting before full criteria for the syndrome are met. Such predi-
agnostic presentations may have qualified for a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder.
Many children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder have symptoms that also
meet criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and for an anxiety dis-
order, with such diagnoses often being present from a relatively early age. For some chil-
dren, the criteria for major depressive disorder may also be met.
Genetic and physiological. In terms of familial aggregation and genetics, it has been
suggested that children presenting with chronic, non-episodic irritability can be differen-
tiated from children with bipolar disorder in their family-based risk. However, these two
groups do not differ in familial rates of anxiety disorders, unipolar depressive disorders,
or substance abuse. Compared with children with pediatric bipolar disorder or other men-
tal illnesses, those with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder exhibit both commonal-
ities and differences in information-processing deficits. For example, face-emotion
labeling deficits, as well as perturbed decision making and cognitive control, are present in
children with bipolar disorder and chronically irritable children, as well as in children
with some other psychiatric conditions. There is also evidence for disorder-specific dys-
function, such as during tasks assessing attention deployment in response to emotional
stimuli, which has demonstrated unique signs of dysfunction in children with chronic ir-
ritability.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Children presenting to clinics with features of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are
predominantly male. Among community samples, a male preponderance appears to be
supported. This difference in prevalence between males and females differentiates disrup-
tive mood dysregulation disorder from bipolar disorder, in which there is an equal gender
prevalence.
Suicide Risk
In general, evidence documenting suicidal behavior and aggression, as well as other se-
vere functional consequences, in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be noted
when evaluating children with chronic irritability.
Functional Consequences of
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
Chronic, severe irritability, such as is seen in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, is
associated with marked disruption in a child’s family and peer relationships, as well as in
school performance. Because of their extremely low frustration tolerance, such children
generally have difficulty succeeding in school; they are often unable to participate in the
activities typically enjoyed by healthy children; their family life is severely disrupted by
their outbursts and irritability; and they have trouble initiating or sustaining friendships.
Levels of dysfunction in children with bipolar disorder and disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder are generally comparable. Both conditions cause severe disruption in the lives of
the affected individual and their families. In both disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
and pediatric bipolar disorder, dangerous behavior, suicidal ideation or suicide attempts,
severe aggression, and psychiatric hospitalization are common.
Differential Diagnosis
Because chronically irritable children and adolescents typically present with complex histo-
ries, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder must be made while consid-
ering the presence or absence of multiple other conditions. Despite the need to consider
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder 159
many other syndromes, differentiation of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder from bi-
polar disorder and oppositional defiant disorder requires particularly careful assessment.
Bipolar disorders. The central feature differentiating disruptive mood dysregulation disor-
der and bipolar disorders in children involves the longitudinal course of the core symptoms. In
children, as in adults, bipolar I disorder and bipolar II disorder manifest as an episodic illness
with discrete episodes of mood perturbation that can be differentiated from the child’s typical
presentation. The mood perturbation that occurs during a manic episode is distinctly different
from the child’s usual mood. In addition, during a manic episode, the change in mood must be
accompanied by the onset, or worsening, of associated cognitive, behavioral, and physical
symptoms (e.g., distractibility, increased goal-directed activity), which are also present to a de-
gree that is distinctly different from the child’s usual baseline. Thus, in the case of a manic ep-
isode, parents (and, depending on developmental level, children) should be able to identify a
distinct time period during which the child’s mood and behavior were markedly different
from usual. In contrast, the irritability of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is persistent
and is present over many months; while it may wax and wane to a certain degree, severe irri-
tability is characteristic of the child with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Thus, while
bipolar disorders are episodic conditions, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is not. In
fact, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder cannot be assigned to a child
who has ever experienced a full-duration hypomanic or manic episode (irritable or euphoric)
or who has ever had a manic or hypomanic episode lasting more than 1 day. Another central
differentiating feature between bipolar disorders and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
is the presence of elevated or expansive mood and grandiosity. These symptoms are common
features of mania but are not characteristic of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Oppositional defiant disorder. While symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder typi-
cally do occur in children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, mood symptoms
of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are relatively rare in children with opposi-
tional defiant disorder. The key features that warrant the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder in children whose symptoms also meet criteria for oppositional de-
fiant disorder are the presence of severe and frequently recurrent outbursts and a persis-
tent disruption in mood between outbursts. In addition, the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder requires severe impairment in at least one setting (i.e., home,
school, or among peers) and mild to moderate impairment in a second setting. For this rea-
son, while most children whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregula-
tion disorder will also have a presentation that meets criteria for oppositional defiant
disorder, the reverse is not the case. That is, in only approximately 15% of individuals with
oppositional defiant disorder would criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
be met. Moreover, even for children in whom criteria for both disorders are met, only the
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made. Finally, both the
prominent mood symptoms in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and the high risk
for depressive and anxiety disorders in follow-up studies justify placement of disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder among the depressive disorders in DSM-5. (Oppositional
defiant disorder is included in the chapter “Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct
Disorders.”) This reflects the more prominent mood component among individuals with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, as compared with individuals with oppositional
defiant disorder. Nevertheless, it also should be noted that disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder appears to carry a high risk for behavioral problems as well as mood problems.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders,
and autism spectrum disorder. Unlike children diagnosed with bipolar disorder or op-
positional defiant disorder, a child whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder also can receive a comorbid diagnosis of ADHD, major depressive
disorder, and/or anxiety disorder. However, children whose irritability is present only in
the context of a major depressive episode or persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia)
160 Depressive Disorders
should receive one of those diagnoses rather than disruptive mood dysregulation disor-
der. Children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder may have symptoms that also
meet criteria for an anxiety disorder and can receive both diagnoses, but children whose ir-
ritability is manifest only in the context of exacerbation of an anxiety disorder should re-
ceive the relevant anxiety disorder diagnosis rather than disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder. In addition, children with autism spectrum disorders frequently present with
temper outbursts when, for example, their routines are disturbed. In that instance, the
temper outbursts would be considered secondary to the autism spectrum disorder, and
the child should not receive the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.
Intermittent explosive disorder. Children with symptoms suggestive of intermittent
explosive disorder present with instances of severe temper outbursts, much like children
with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. However, unlike disruptive mood dysreg-
ulation disorder, intermittent explosive disorder does not require persistent disruption in
mood between outbursts. In addition, intermittent explosive disorder requires only 3 months
of active symptoms, in contrast to the 12-month requirement for disruptive mood dys-
regulation disorder. Thus, these two diagnoses should not be made in the same child. For
children with outbursts and intercurrent, persistent irritability, only the diagnosis of dis-
ruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made.
Comorbidity
Rates of comorbidity in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder are extremely high. It is
rare to find individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder alone. Comorbidity between disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and other
DSM-defined syndromes appears higher than for many other pediatric mental illnesses;
the strongest overlap is with oppositional defiant disorder. Not only is the overall rate of
comorbidity high in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, but also the range of comor-
bid illnesses appears particularly diverse. These children typically present to the clinic
with a wide range of disruptive behavior, mood, anxiety, and even autism spectrum
symptoms and diagnoses. However, children with disruptive mood dysregulation disor-
der should not have symptoms that meet criteria for bipolar disorder, as in that context,
only the bipolar disorder diagnosis should be made. If children have symptoms that meet
criteria for oppositional defiant disorder or intermittent explosive disorder and disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disor-
der should be assigned. Also, as noted earlier, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregu-
lation disorder should not be assigned if the symptoms occur only in an anxiety-
provoking context, when the routines of a child with autism spectrum disorder or obses-
sive-compulsive disorder are disturbed, or in the context of a major depressive episode.
Major Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week
period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms
is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note: Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical condition.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjec-
tive report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,
appears tearful). (Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the
day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
Major Depressive Disorder 161
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than
5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or increase in appetite nearly every day.
(Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
4. 5. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others, not
merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. 7. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delu-
sional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (ei-
ther by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation with-
out a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or to another
medical condition.
Note: Criteria A–C represent a major depressive episode.
Note: Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a nat-
ural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of intense sad-
ness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Criterion A,
which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be understand-
able or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode in
addition to the normal response to a significant loss should also be carefully considered. This
decision inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on the individual’s history
and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context of loss.1
D. The occurrence of the major depressive episode is not better explained by schizoaf-
fective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or
other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
E. There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.
Note: This exclusion does not apply if all of the manic-like or hypomanic-like episodes
are substance-induced or are attributable to the physiological effects of another med-
ical condition.
1 In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in
grief the predominant affect is feelings of emptiness and loss, while in MDE it is persistent
depressed mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is
likely to decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of
grief. These waves tend to be associated with thoughts or reminders of the deceased. The
depressed mood of MDE is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations.
The pain of grief may be accompanied by positive emotions and humor that are uncharacteristic
of the pervasive unhappiness and misery characteristic of MDE. The thought content associated
with grief generally features a preoccupation with thoughts and memories of the deceased,
rather than the self-critical or pessimistic ruminations seen in MDE. In grief, self-esteem is gener-
ally preserved, whereas in MDE feelings of worthlessness and self-loathing are common. If self-
derogatory ideation is present in grief, it typically involves perceived failings vis-à-vis the
deceased (e.g., not visiting frequently enough, not telling the deceased how much he or she was
loved). If a bereaved individual thinks about death and dying, such thoughts are generally
focused on the deceased and possibly about “joining” the deceased, whereas in MDE such
thoughts are focused on ending one’s own life because of feeling worthless, undeserving of life,
or unable to cope with the pain of depression.
162 Depressive Disorders
Coding and Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for major depressive disorder is based on whether this is a single or
recurrent episode, current severity, presence of psychotic features, and remission status.
Current severity and psychotic features are only indicated if full criteria are currently met
for a major depressive episode. Remission specifiers are only indicated if the full criteria
are not currently met for a major depressive episode. Codes are as follows:
Severity/course specifier Single episode Recurrent episode*
Mild (p. 188) 296.21 (F32.0) 296.31 (F33.0)
Moderate (p. 188) 296.22 (F32.1) 296.32 (F33.1)
Severe (p. 188) 296.23 (F32.2) 296.33 (F33.2)
With psychotic features** (p. 186) 296.24 (F32.3) 296.34 (F33.3)
In partial remission (p. 188) 296.25 (F32.4) 296.35 (F33.41)
In full remission (p. 188) 296.26 (F32.5) 296.36 (F33.42)
Unspecified 296.20 (F32.9) 296.30 (F33.9)
*For an episode to be considered recurrent, there must be an interval of at least 2 consecutive months
between separate episodes in which criteria are not met for a major depressive episode. The defini-
tions of specifiers are found on the indicated pages.
**If psychotic features are present, code the “with psychotic features” specifier irrespective of epi-
sode severity.
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: major
depressive disorder, single or recurrent episode, severity/psychotic/remission specifiers,
followed by as many of the following specifiers without codes that apply to the current
episode.
Specify:
With anxious distress (p. 184)
With mixed features (pp. 184–185)
With melancholic features (p. 185)
With atypical features (pp. 185–186)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 186)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features (p. 186)
With catatonia (p. 186). Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1).
With peripartum onset (pp. 186–187)
With seasonal pattern (recurrent episode only) (pp. 187–188)
Diagnostic Features
The criterion symptoms for major depressive disorder must be present nearly every day to
be considered present, with the exception of weight change and suicidal ideation. De-
pressed mood must be present for most of the day, in addition to being present nearly ev-
ery day. Often insomnia or fatigue is the presenting complaint, and failure to probe for
accompanying depressive symptoms will result in underdiagnosis. Sadness may be de-
nied at first but may be elicited through interview or inferred from facial expression and
demeanor. With individuals who focus on a somatic complaint, clinicians should de-
termine whether the distress from that complaint is associated with specific depressive
symptoms. Fatigue and sleep disturbance are present in a high proportion of cases; psy-
chomotor disturbances are much less common but are indicative of greater overall sever-
ity, as is the presence of delusional or near-delusional guilt.
Major Depressive Disorder 163
The essential feature of a major depressive episode is a period of at least 2 weeks during
which there is either depressed mood or the loss of interest or pleasure in nearly all activi-
ties (Criterion A). In children and adolescents, the mood may be irritable rather than sad.
The individual must also experience at least four additional symptoms drawn from a list
that includes changes in appetite or weight, sleep, and psychomotor activity; decreased en-
ergy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; difficulty thinking, concentrating, or making deci-
sions; or recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal ideation or suicide plans or attempts. To
count toward a major depressive episode, a symptom must either be newly present or must
have clearly worsened compared with the person’s pre-episode status. The symptoms
must persist for most of the day, nearly every day, for at least 2 consecutive weeks. The ep-
isode must be accompanied by clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occu-
pational, or other important areas of functioning. For some individuals with milder
episodes, functioning may appear to be normal but requires markedly increased effort.
The mood in a major depressive episode is often described by the person as depressed,
sad, hopeless, discouraged, or “down in the dumps” (Criterion A1). In some cases, sadness
may be denied at first but may subsequently be elicited by interview (e.g., by pointing out
that the individual looks as if he or she is about to cry). In some individuals who complain
of feeling “blah,” having no feelings, or feeling anxious, the presence of a depressed mood
can be inferred from the person’s facial expression and demeanor. Some individuals em-
phasize somatic complaints (e.g., bodily aches and pains) rather than reporting feelings of
sadness. Many individuals report or exhibit increased irritability (e.g., persistent anger, a
tendency to respond to events with angry outbursts or blaming others, an exaggerated
sense of frustration over minor matters). In children and adolescents, an irritable or cranky
mood may develop rather than a sad or dejected mood. This presentation should be dif-
ferentiated from a pattern of irritability when frustrated.
Loss of interest or pleasure is nearly always present, at least to some degree. Individ-
uals may report feeling less interested in hobbies, “not caring anymore,” or not feeling any
enjoyment in activities that were previously considered pleasurable (Criterion A2). Family
members often notice social withdrawal or neglect of pleasurable avocations (e.g., a for-
merly avid golfer no longer plays, a child who used to enjoy soccer finds excuses not to
practice). In some individuals, there is a significant reduction from previous levels of sex-
ual interest or desire.
Appetite change may involve either a reduction or increase. Some depressed individ-
uals report that they have to force themselves to eat. Others may eat more and may crave
specific foods (e.g., sweets or other carbohydrates). When appetite changes are severe (in
either direction), there may be a significant loss or gain in weight, or, in children, a failure
to make expected weight gains may be noted (Criterion A3).
Sleep disturbance may take the form of either difficulty sleeping or sleeping exces-
sively (Criterion A4). When insomnia is present, it typically takes the form of middle in-
somnia (i.e., waking up during the night and then having difficulty returning to sleep) or
terminal insomnia (i.e., waking too early and being unable to return to sleep). Initial in-
somnia (i.e., difficulty falling asleep) may also occur. Individuals who present with over-
sleeping (hypersomnia) may experience prolonged sleep episodes at night or increased
daytime sleep. Sometimes the reason that