ntercourse/penetration (Criterion A1) can vary from a total in-
ability to experience vaginal penetration in any situation (e.g., intercourse, gynecological ex-
aminations, tampon insertion) to the ability to easily experience penetration in one situation
and but not in another. Although the most common clinical situation is when a woman is un-
able to experience intercourse or penetration with a partner, difficulties in undergoing re-
quired gynecological examinations may also be present. Marked vulvovaginal or pelvic pain
during vaginal intercourse or penetration attempts (Criterion A2) refers to pain occurring in differ-
ent locations in the genito-pelvic area. Location of pain as well as intensity should be assessed.
Typically, pain can be characterized as superficial (vulvovaginal or occurring during penetra-
tion) or deep (pelvic; i.e., not felt until deeper penetration). The intensity of the pain is often not
linearly related to distress or interference with sexual intercourse or other sexual activities.
Some genito-pelvic pain only occurs when provoked (i.e., by intercourse or mechanical stim-
438 Sexual Dysfunctions
ulation); other genito-pelvic pain may be spontaneous as well as provoked. Genito-pelvic pain
can also be usefully characterized qualitatively (e.g., “burning,” “cutting,” “shooting,” “throb-
bing”). The pain may persist for a period after intercourse is completed and may also occur
during urination. Typically, the pain experienced during sexual intercourse can be reproduced
during a gynecological examination.
Marked fear or anxiety about vulvovaginal or pelvic pain either in anticipation of, or during, or
as a result of vaginal penetration (Criterion A3) is commonly reported by women who have
regularly experienced pain during sexual intercourse. This “normal” reaction may lead to
avoidance of sexual/intimate situations. In other cases, this marked fear does not appear
to be closely related to the experience of pain but nonetheless leads to avoidance of inter-
course and vaginal penetration situations. Some have described this as similar to a phobic
reaction except that the phobic object may be vaginal penetration or the fear of pain.
Marked tensing or tightening of the pelvic floor muscles during attempted vaginal penetration
(Criterion A4) can vary from reflexive-like spasm of the pelvic floor in response to at-
tempted vaginal entry to “normal/voluntary” muscle guarding in response to the antici-
pated or the repeated experience of pain or to fear or anxiety. In the case of “normal/
guarding” reactions, penetration may be possible under circumstances of relaxation. The
characterization and assessment of pelvic floor dysfunction is often best undertaken by a
specialist gynecologist or by a pelvic floor physical therapist.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is frequently associated with other sexual dysfunc-
tions, particularly reduced sexual desire and interest (female sexual interest/arousal disor-
der). Sometimes desire and interest are preserved in sexual situations that are not painful or
do not require penetration. Even when individuals with genito-pelvic pain/penetration dis-
order report sexual interest/motivation, there is often behavioral avoidance of sexual situ-
ations and opportunities. Avoidance of gynecological examinations despite medical
recommendations is also frequent. The pattern of avoidance is similar to that seen in phobic
disorders. It is common for women who have not succeeded in having sexual intercourse to
come for treatment only when they wish to conceive. Many women with genito-pelvic pain/
penetration disorder will experience associated relationship/marital problems; they also of-
ten report that the symptoms significantly diminish their feelings of femininity.
In addition to the subtype “lifelong/acquired,” five factors should be considered dur-
ing assessment and diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder because they
may be relevant to etiology and/or treatment: 1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual
problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship factors (e.g., poor communication, dis-
crepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual vulnerability factors (e.g., poor body
image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression,
anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhi-
bitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes toward sexuality); and
5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment. Each of these factors may
contribute differently to the presenting symptoms of different women with this disorder.
There are no valid physiological measures of any of the component symptom dimen-
sions of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder. Validated psychometric inventories may
be used to formally assess the pain and anxiety components related to genito-pelvic pain/
penetration disorder.
Prevalence
The prevalence of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is unknown. However, approx-
imately 15% of women in North America report recurrent pain during intercourse. Diffi-
culties having intercourse appear to be a frequent referral to sexual dysfunction clinics and
to specialist clinicians.
Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder 439
Development and Course
The development and course of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is unclear. Because
women generally do not seek treatment until they experience problems in sexual functioning,
it can, in general, be difficult to characterize genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder as life-
long (primary) or acquired (secondary). Although women typically come to clinical atten-
tion after the initiation of sexual activity, there are often earlier clinical signs. For example,
difficulty with or the avoidance of use of tampons is an important predictor of later problems.
Difficulties with vaginal penetration (inability or fear or pain) may not be obvious until sex-
ual intercourse is attempted. Even once intercourse is attempted, the frequency of attempts
may not be significant or regular. In cases where it is difficult to establish whether symptom-
atology is lifelong or acquired, it is useful to determine the presence of any consistent period
of successful pain-, fear-, and tension-free intercourse. If the experience of such a period can
be established, then genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder can be characterized as ac-
quired. Once symptomatology is well established for a period of approximately 6 months,
the probability of spontaneous and significant symptomatic remission appears to diminish.
Complaints related to genito-pelvic pain peak during early adulthood and in the peri-
and postmenopausal period. Women with complaints about difficulty having intercourse
appear to be primarily premenopausal. There may also be an increase in genito-pelvic
pain–related symptoms in the postpartum period.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Sexual and/or physical abuse have often been cited as predictors of the
DSM-IV-defined sexual pain disorders dyspareunia and vaginismus. This is a matter of con-
troversy in the current literature.
Genetic and physiological. Women experiencing superficial pain during sexual inter-
course often report the onset of the pain after a history of vaginal infections. Even after the in-
fections have resolved and there are no known residual physical findings, the pain persists.
Pain during tampon insertion or the inability to insert tampons before any sexual contact has
been attempted is an important risk factor for genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In the past, inadequate sexual education and religious orthodoxy have often been consid-
ered to be culturally related predisposing factors to the DSM-IV diagnosis of vaginismus.
This perception appears to be confirmed by recent reports from Turkey, a primarily Mus-
lim country, indicating a strikingly high prevalence for the disorder. However, most avail-
able research, although limited in scope, does not support this notion (Lahaie et al. 2010).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
By definition, the diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder is only given to
women. There is relatively new research concerning urological chronic pelvic pain syn-
drome in men, suggesting that men may experience some similar problems. The research
and clinical experience are not sufficiently developed yet to justify the application of this
diagnosis to men. Other specified sexual dysfunction or unspecified sexual dysfunction
may be diagnosed in men appearing to fit this pattern.
Functional Consequences of
Genito-Pelvic Pain/Penetration Disorder
Functional difficulties in genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder are often associated
with interference in relationship satisfaction and sometimes with the ability to conceive
via penile/vaginal intercourse.
440 Sexual Dysfunctions
Differential Diagnosis
Another medical condition. In many instances, women with genito-pelvic pain/pene-
tration disorder will also be diagnosed with another medical condition (e.g., lichen scle-
rosus, endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, vulvovaginal atrophy). In some cases,
treating the medical condition may alleviate the genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder.
Much of the time, this is not the case. There are no reliable tools or diagnostic methods to
allow clinicians to know whether the medical condition or genito-pelvic pain/penetration
disorder is primary. Often, the associated medical conditions are difficult to diagnose and
treat. For example, the increased incidence of postmenopausal pain during intercourse
may sometimes be attributable to vaginal dryness or vulvovaginal atrophy associated with
declining estrogen levels. The relationship, however, between vulvovaginal atrophy/dry-
ness, estrogen, and pain is not well understood.
Somatic symptom and related disorders. Some women with genito-pelvic pain/pene-
tration disorder may also be diagnosable with somatic symptom disorder. Since both
genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder and the somatic symptom and related disorders
are new diagnoses, it is not yet clear whether they can be reliably differentiated. Some
women diagnosed with genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder will also be diagnosed
with a specific phobia.
Inadequate sexual stimuli. It is important that the clinician, in considering differential diag-
noses, assess the adequacy of sexual stimuli within the woman’s sexual experience. Sexual sit-
uations in which there is inadequate foreplay or arousal may lead to difficulties in penetration,
pain, or avoidance. Erectile dysfunction or premature ejaculation in the male partner may
result in difficulties with penetration. These conditions should be carefully assessed. In some
situations, a diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder may not be appropriate.
Comorbidity
Comorbidity between genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder and other sexual difficul-
ties appears to be common. Comorbidity with relationship distress is also common. This is
not surprising, since in Western cultures the inability to have (pain-free) intercourse with
a desired partner and the avoidance of sexual opportunities may be either a contributing
factor to or the result of other sexual or relationship problems. Because pelvic floor symp-
toms are implicated in the diagnosis of genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, there is
likely to be a higher prevalence of other disorders related to the pelvic floor or reproduc-
tive organs (e.g., interstitial cystitis, constipation, vaginal infection, endometriosis, irrita-
ble bowel syndrome).
Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 302.71 (F52.0)
A. Persistently or recurrently deficient (or absent) sexual/erotic thoughts or fantasies and
desire for sexual activity. The judgment of deficiency is made by the clinician, taking
into account factors that affect sexual functioning, such as age and general and socio-
cultural contexts of the individual’s life.
B. The symptoms in Criterion A have persisted for a minimum duration of approximately
6 months.
C. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress in the individual.
D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a
consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors and is not at-
tributable to thes effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.
Male Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder 441
Specify whether:
Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became sexually
active.
Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual function.
Specify whether:
Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Evidence of mild distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Moderate: Evidence of moderate distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Severe: Evidence of severe or extreme distress over the symptoms in Criterion A.
Diagnostic Features
When an assessment for male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is being made, inter-
personal context must be taken into account. A “desire discrepancy,” in which a man has
lower desire for sexual activity than his partner, is not sufficient to diagnose male hypo-
active sexual desire disorder. Both low/absent desire for sex and deficient/absent sexual
thoughts or fantasies are required for a diagnosis of the disorder. There may be variation
across men in how sexual desire is expressed.
The lack of desire for sex and deficient/absent erotic thoughts or fantasies must be per-
sistent or recurrent and must occur for a minimum duration of approximately 6 months.
The inclusion of this duration criterion is meant to safeguard against making a diagnosis in
cases in which a man’s low sexual desire may represent an adaptive response to adverse
life conditions (e.g., concern about a partner’s pregnancy when the man is considering ter-
minating the relationship). The introduction of “approximately” in Criterion B allows for
clinician judgment in cases in which symptom duration does not meet the recommended
6-month threshold.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is sometimes associated with erectile and/or ejac-
ulatory concerns. For example, persistent difficulties obtaining an erection may lead a man
to lose interest in sexual activity. Men with hypoactive sexual desire disorder often report
that they no longer initiate sexual activity and that they are minimally receptive to a part-
ner’s attempt to initiate. Sexual activities (e.g., masturbation or partnered sexual activity)
may sometimes occur even in the presence of low sexual desire. Relationship-specific pref-
erences regarding patterns of sexual initiation must be taken into account when making a
diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder. Although men are more likely to ini-
tiate sexual activity, and thus low desire may be characterized by a pattern of non-initiation,
many men may prefer to have their partner initiate sexual activity. In such situations, the
man’s lack of receptivity to a partner’s initiation should be considered when evaluating low
desire.
In addition to the subtypes “lifelong/acquired” and “generalized/situational,” the fol-
lowing five factors must be considered during assessment and diagnosis of male hypo-
active sexual desire disorder given that they may be relevant to etiology and/or treatment:
1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship
factors (e.g., poor communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individ-
ual vulnerability factors (e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psy-
chiatric comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), or stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement);
4) cultural/religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity;
attitudes toward sexuality); and 5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treat-
442 Sexual Dysfunctions
ment. Each of these factors may contribute differently to the presenting symptoms of dif-
ferent men with this disorder.
Prevalence
The prevalence of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder varies depending on country of
origin and method of assessment. Approximately 6% of younger men (ages 18–24 years)
and 41% of older men (ages 66–74 years) have problems with sexual desire. However, a
persistent lack of interest in sex, lasting 6 months or more, affects only a small proportion
of men ages 16–44 (1.8%).
Development and Course
By definition, lifelong male hypoactive sexual desire disorder indicates that low or no sex-
ual desire has always been present, whereas the acquired subtype would be assigned if the
man’s low desire developed after a period of normal sexual desire. There is a requirement
that low desire persist for approximately 6 months or more; thus, short-term changes in
sexual desire should not be diagnosed as male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.
There is a normative age-related decline in sexual desire. Like women, men identify a
variety of triggers for their sexual desire, and they describe a wide range of reasons that
they choose to engage in sexual activity. Although erotic visual cues may be more potent
elicitors of desire in younger men, the potency of sexual cues may decrease with age and
must be considered when evaluating men for hypoactive sexual desire disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Mood and anxiety symptoms appear to be strong predictors of low de-
sire in men. Up to half of men with a past history of psychiatric symptoms may have mod-
erate or severe loss of desire, compared with only 15% of those without such a history. A
man’s feelings about himself, his perception of his partner’s sexual desire toward him,
feelings of being emotionally connected, and contextual variables may all negatively (as
well as positively) affect sexual desire.
Environmental. Alcohol use may increase the occurrence of low desire. Among gay men,
self-directed homophobia, interpersonal problems, attitudes, lack of adequate sex educa-
tion, and trauma resulting from early life experiences must be taken into account in ex-
plaining the low desire. Social and cultural contextual factors should also be considered.
Genetic and physiological. Endocrine disorders such as hyperprolactinemia signifi-
cantly affect sexual desire in men. Age is a significant risk factor for low desire in men. It is
unclear whether or not men with low desire also have abnormally low levels of testoster-
one; however, among hypogonadal men, low desire is common. There also may be a crit-
ical threshold below which testosterone will affect sexual desire in men and above which
there is little effect of testosterone on men’s desire.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is marked variability in prevalence rates of low desire across cultures, ranging from
12.5% in Northern European men to 28% in Southeast Asian men ages 40–80 years. Just as
there are higher rates of low desire among East Asian subgroups of women, men of East
Asian ancestry also have higher rates of low desire. Guilt about sex may mediate this as-
sociation between East Asian ethnicity and sexual desire in men.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In contrast to the classification of sexual disorders in women, desire and arousal disorders
have been retained as separate constructs in men. Despite some similarities in the experi-
Premature (Early) Ejaculation 443
ence of desire across men and women, and the fact that desire fluctuates over time and is
dependent on contextual factors, men do report a significantly higher intensity and fre-
quency of sexual desire compared with women.
Differential Diagnosis
Nonsexual mental disorders. Nonsexual mental disorders, such as major depressive
disorder, which is characterized by “markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or al-
most all, activities,” may explain the lack of sexual desire. If the lack of desire is better
explained by another mental disorder, then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire
disorder would not be made.
Substance/medication use. Substance/medication use may explain the lack of sexual
desire.
Another medical condition. If the low/absent desire and deficient/absent erotic thoughts
or fantasies are better explained by the effects of another medical condition (e.g., hypogo-
nadism, diabetes mellitus, thyroid dysfunction, central nervous system disease), then a di-
agnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be made.
Interpersonal factors. If interpersonal or significant contextual factors, such as severe
relationship distress or other significant stressors, are associated with the loss of desire in
the man, then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder would not be made.
Other sexual dysfunctions. The presence of another sexual dysfunction does not rule out a
diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder; there is some evidence that up to one-half
of men with low sexual desire also have erectile difficulties, and slightly fewer may also have
early ejaculation difficulties. If the man’s low desire is explained by self-identification as an
asexual, then a diagnosis of male hypoactive sexual desire disorder is not made.
Comorbidity
Depression and other mental disorders, as well as endocrinological factors, are often co-
morbid with male hypoactive sexual desire disorder.
Premature (Early) Ejaculation
Diagnostic Criteria 302.75 (F52.4)
A. A persistent or recurrent pattern of ejaculation occurring during partnered sexual activ-
ity within approximately 1 minute following vaginal penetration and before the individ-
ual wishes it.
Note: Although the diagnosis of premature (early) ejaculation may be applied to indi-
viduals engaged in nonvaginal sexual activities, specific duration criteria have not been
established for these activities.
B. The symptom in Criterion A must have been present for at least 6 months and must be
experienced on almost all or all (approximately 75%–100%) occasions of sexual activ-
ity (in identified situational contexts or, if generalized, in all contexts).
C. The symptom in Criterion A causes clinically significant distress in the individual.
D. The sexual dysfunction is not better explained by a nonsexual mental disorder or as a
consequence of severe relationship distress or other significant stressors and is not at-
tributable to the effects of a substance/medication or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
Lifelong: The disturbance has been present since the individual became sexually active.
Acquired: The disturbance began after a period of relatively normal sexual function.
444 Sexual Dysfunctions
Specify whether:
Generalized: Not limited to certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Situational: Only occurs with certain types of stimulation, situations, or partners.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Ejaculation occurring within approximately 30 seconds to 1 minute of vaginal
penetration.
Moderate: Ejaculation occurring within approximately 15–30 seconds of vaginal pen-
etration.
Severe: Ejaculation occurring prior to sexual activity, at the start of sexual activity, or
within approximately 15 seconds of vaginal penetration.
Diagnostic Features
Premature (early) ejaculation is manifested by ejaculation that occurs prior to or shortly af-
ter vaginal penetration, operationalized by an individual’s estimate of ejaculatory latency
(i.e., elapsed time before ejaculation) after vaginal penetration. Estimated and measured
intravaginal ejaculatory latencies are highly correlated as long as the ejaculatory latency is
of short duration; therefore, self-reported estimates of ejaculatory latency are sufficient for
diagnostic purposes. A 60-second intravaginal ejaculatory latency time is an appropriate
cutoff for the diagnosis of lifelong premature (early) ejaculation in heterosexual men.
There are insufficient data to determine if this duration criterion can be applied to ac-
quired premature (early) ejaculation. The durational definition may apply to males of
varying sexual orientations, since ejaculatory latencies appear to be similar across men of
different sexual orientations and across different sexual activities.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Many males with premature (early) ejaculation complain of a sense of lack of control over
ejaculation and report apprehension about their anticipated inability to delay ejaculation
on future sexual encounters.
The following factors may be relevant in the evaluation of any sexual dysfunction:
1) partner factors (e.g., partner’s sexual problems, partner’s health status); 2) relationship fac-
tors (e.g., poor communication, discrepancies in desire for sexual activity); 3) individual
vulnerability factors (e.g., poor body image, history of sexual or emotional abuse), psychiatric
comorbidity (e.g., depression, anxiety), and stressors (e.g., job loss, bereavement); 4) cultural/
religious factors (e.g., inhibitions related to prohibitions against sexual activity; attitudes
toward sexuality); and 5) medical factors relevant to prognosis, course, or treatment.
Prevalence
Estimates of the prevalence of premature (early) ejaculation vary widely depending on the
definition utilized. Internationally, more than 20%–30% of men ages 18–70 years report
concern about how rapidly they ejaculate. With the new definition of premature (early)
ejaculation (i.e., ejaculation occurring within approximately 1 minute of vaginal penetra-
tion), only 1%–3% of men would be diagnosed with the disorder. Prevalence of premature
(early) ejaculation may increase with age.
Development and Course
By definition, lifelong premature (early) ejaculation starts during a male’s initial sexual ex-
periences and persists thereafter. Some men may experience premature (early) ejaculation
during their initial sexual encounters but gain ejaculatory control over time. It is the persis-
tence of ejaculatory problems for longer than 6 months that determines the diagnosis of pre-
mature (early) ejaculation. In contrast, some men develop the disorder after a period of
Premature (Early) Ejaculation 445
having a normal ejaculatory latency, known as acquired premature (early) ejaculation. There is
far less known about acquired premature (early) ejaculation than about lifelong premature
(early) ejaculation. The acquired form likely has a later onset, usually appearing during or af-
ter the fourth decade of life. Lifelong is relatively stable throughout life. Little is known about
the course of acquired premature (early) ejaculation. Reversal of medical conditions such as
hyperthyroidism and prostatitis appears to restore ejaculatory latencies to baseline values.
Lifelong premature (early) ejaculation begins with early sexual experiences and persists
throughout an individual’s life. In approximately 20% of men with premature (early) ejacu-
lation, ejaculatory latencies decrease further with age. Age and relationship length have been
found to be negatively associated with prevalence of premature (early) ejaculation.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Premature (early) ejaculation may be more common in men with anx-
iety disorders, especially social anxiety disorder (social phobia).
Genetic and physiological. There is a moderate genetic contribution to lifelong prema-
ture (early) ejaculation. Premature (early) ejaculation may be associated with dopamine
transporter gene polymorphism or serotonin transporter gene polymorphism. Thyroid
disease, prostatitis, and drug withdrawal are associated with acquired premature (early)
ejaculation. Positron emission tomography measures of regional cerebral blood flow dur-
ing ejaculation have shown primary activation in the mesocephalic transition zone, includ-
ing the ventral tegmental area.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Perception of what constitutes a normal ejaculatory latency is different in many cultures.
Measured ejaculatory latencies may differ in some countries. Such differences may be ex-
plained by cultural or religious factors as well as genetic differences between populations.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Premature (early) ejaculation is a sexual disorder in males. Males and their sexual partners
may differ in their perception of what constitutes an acceptable ejaculatory latency. There
may be increasing concerns in females about early ejaculation in their sexual partners,
which may be a reflection of changing societal attitudes concerning female sexual activity.
Diagnostic Markers
Ejaculatory latency is usually monitored in research settings by the sexual partner utilizing
a timing device (e.g., stopwatch), though this is not ideal in real-life sexual situations. For
vaginal intercourse, the time between intravaginal penetration and ejaculation is measured.
Functional Consequences of
Premature (Early) Ejaculation
A pattern of premature (early) ejaculation may be associated with decreased self-esteem, a
sense of lack of control, and adverse consequences for partner relationships. It may also
cause personal distress in the sexual partner and decreased sexual satisfaction in the sexual
partner. Ejaculation prior to penetration may be associated with difficulties in conception.
Differential Diagnosis
Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction. When problems with premature
ejaculation are due exclusively to substance use, intoxication, or withdrawal, substance/
medication-induced sexual dysfunction should be diagnosed.
446 Sexual Dysfunctions
Ejaculatory concerns that do not meet diagnostic criteria. It is necessary to identify
males with normal ejaculatory latencies who desire longer ejaculatory latencies and males
who have episodic premature (early) ejaculation (e.g., during the first sexual encounter
with a new partner when a short ejaculatory latency may be common or normative). Neither
of these situations would lead to a diagnosis of premature (early) ejaculation, even though
these situations may be distressing to some males.
Comorbidity
Premature (early) ejaculation may be associated with erectile problems. In many cases, it
may be difficult to determine which difficulty preceded the other. Lifelong premature
(early) ejaculation may be associated with certain anxiety disorders. Acquired premature
(early) ejaculation may be associated with prostatitis, thyroid disease, or drug withdrawal
(e.g., during opioid withdrawal).
Substance/Medication-Induced
Sexual Dysfunction
Diagnostic Criteria
A. B. A clinically significant disturbance in sexual function is predominant in the clinical picture.
There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
(1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite-
rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a sexual dysfunction that is not substance/
medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent sexual dysfunction could in-
clude the following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms
persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of
acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the
existence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunc-
tion (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress in the individual.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical
picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medica-
tion]-induced sexual dysfunctions are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM
code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for the
same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-
induced sexual dysfunction, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should record
“mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced sexual dysfunction (e.g., “mild
cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced sexual dysfunction”). If a moderate or severe
substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced sexual dysfunction, the 4th
position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use disorder”
or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid substance
Substance/Medication-Induced Sexual Dysfunction 447
use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy
use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should record
only the substance-induced sexual dysfunction.
ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CM
With use
disorder,
mild
With use
disorder,
moderate
or severe
Without
use
disorder
Alcohol 291.89 F10.181 F10.281 F10.981
Opioid 292.89 F11.181 F11.281 F11.981
Sedative, hypnotic, or
292.89 F13.181 F13.281 F13.981
anxiolytic
Amphetamine (or other
292.89 F15.181 F15.281 F15.981
stimulant)
Cocaine 292.89 F14.181 F14.281 F14.981
Other (or unknown) substance 292.89 F19.181 F19.281 F19.981
Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for di-
agnoses associated with substance class):
With onset during intoxication: If the criteria are met for intoxication with the sub-
stance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If criteria are met for withdrawal from the substance
and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use: Symptoms may appear either at initiation of medi-
cation or after a modification or change in use.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Occurs on 25%–50% of occasions of sexual activity.
Moderate: Occurs on 50%–75% of occasions of sexual activity.
Severe: Occurs on 75% or more of occasions of sexual activity.
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction begins
with the specific substance (e.g., alcohol, fluoxetine) that is presumed to be causing the
sexual dysfunction. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria
set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes
(e.g., fluoxetine), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a
substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is un-
known, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use), followed by the se-
verity specifier (e.g., mild, moderate, severe). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-
CM, which combine the substance-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a sin-
gle code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder.
For example, in the case of erectile dysfunction occurring during intoxication in a man
with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is 291.89 alcohol-induced sexual dysfunc-
tion, with onset during intoxication, moderate. An additional diagnosis of 303.90 severe
alcohol use disorder is also given. When more than one substance is judged to play a sig-
448 Sexual Dysfunctions
nificant role in the development of the sexual dysfunction, each should be listed separately
(e.g., 292.89 cocaine-induced sexual dysfunction with onset during intoxication, moderate;
292.89 fluoxetine-induced sexual dysfunction, with onset after medication use).
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction begins
with the specific substance (e.g., alcohol, fluoxetine) that is presumed to be causing the
sexual dysfunction. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria
set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use
disorder. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., fluoxetine), the code for
“other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an eti-
ological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown sub-
stance” should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any)
is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
sexual dysfunction, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication,
onset during withdrawal, with onset after medication use), followed by the severity spec-
ifier (e.g., mild, moderate, severe). For example, in the case of erectile dysfunction occur-
ring during intoxication in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is
F10.281 moderate alcohol use disorder with alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction, with on-
set during intoxication, moderate. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use
disorder is not given. If the substance-induced sexual dysfunction occurs without a co-
morbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no ac-
companying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F15.981 amphetamine-induced sexual
dysfunction, with onset during intoxication). When more than one substance is judged to
play a significant role in the development of the sexual dysfunction, each should be listed
separately (e.g., F14.181 mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced sexual dysfunc-
tion, with onset during intoxication, moderate; F19.981 fluoxetine-induced sexual dys-
function, with onset after medication use, moderate).
Diagnostic Features
The major feature is a disturbance in sexual function that has a temporal relationship with
substance/medication initiation, dose increase, or substance/medication discontinuation.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants (including co-
caine); and other (or unknown) substances. Sexual dysfunctions can occur in association
with withdrawal from the following classes of substances: alcohol; opioids; sedatives, hyp-
notics, or anxiolytics; and other (or unknown) substances. Medications that can induce sex-
ual dysfunctions include antidepressants, antipsychotics, and hormonal contraceptives.
The most commonly reported side effect of antidepressant drugs is difficulty with or-
gasm or ejaculation. Problems with desire and erection are less frequent. Approximately
30% of sexual complaints are clinically significant. Certain agents, such as bupropion and
mirtazapine, appear not to be associated with sexual side effects.
The sexual problems associated with antipsychotic drugs, including problems with
sexual desire, erection, lubrication, ejaculation, or orgasm, have occurred with typical as
well as atypical agents. However, problems are less common with prolactin-sparing anti-
psychotics than with agents that cause significant prolactin elevation.
Although the effects of mood stabilizers on sexual function are unclear, it is possible
that lithium and anticonvulsants, with the possible exception of lamotrigine, have adverse
effects on sexual desire. Problems with orgasm may occur with gabapentin. Similarly, there
may be a higher prevalence of erectile and orgasmic problems associated with benzodiaz-
epines. There have not been such reports with buspirone.
Substance/Medication-Induced Sexual Dysfunction 449
Many nonpsychiatric medications, such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal,
and hormonal agents, are associated with disturbances in sexual function. Illicit substance
use is associated with decreased sexual desire, erectile dysfunction, and difficulty reach-
ing orgasm. Sexual dysfunctions are also seen in individuals receiving methadone but are
seldom reported by patients receiving buprenorphine. Chronic alcohol abuse and chronic
nicotine abuse are associated with erectile problems.
Prevalence
The prevalence and the incidence of substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction
are unclear, likely because of underreporting of treatment-emergent sexual side effects.
Data on substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction typically concern the effects of
antidepressant drugs. The prevalence of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction var-
ies in part depending on the specific agent. Approximately 25%–80% of individuals taking
monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, serotonergic antidepressants,
and combined serotonergic-adrenergic antidepressants report sexual side effects. There
are differences in the incidence of sexual side effects between some serotonergic and com-
bined adrenergic-serotonergic antidepressants, although it is unclear if these differences
are clinically significant.
Approximately 50% of individuals taking antipsychotic medications will experience
adverse sexual side effects, including problems with sexual desire, erection, lubrication,
ejaculation, or orgasm. The incidence of these side effects among different antipsychotic
agents is unclear.
Exact prevalence and incidence of sexual dysfunctions among users of nonpsychiatric
medications such as cardiovascular, cytotoxic, gastrointestinal, and hormonal agents are
unknown. Elevated rates of sexual dysfunction have been reported with methadone or
high-dose opioid drugs for pain. There are increased rates of decreased sexual desire, erec-
tile dysfunction, and difficulty reaching orgasm associated with illicit substance use. The
prevalence of sexual problems appears related to chronic drug abuse and appears higher
in individuals who abuse heroin (approximately 60%–70%) than in individuals who abuse
amphetamines or 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (i.e., MDMA, ecstasy). Elevated
rates of sexual dysfunction are also seen in individuals receiving methadone but are sel-
dom reported by patients receiving buprenorphine. Chronic alcohol abuse and chronic
nicotine abuse are related to higher rates of erectile problems.
Development and Course
The onset of antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction may be as early as 8 days after the
agent is first taken. Approximately 30% of individuals with mild to moderate orgasm de-
lay will experience spontaneous remission of the dysfunction within 6 months. In some
cases, serotonin reuptake inhibitor–induced sexual dysfunction may persist after the
agent is discontinued. The time to onset of sexual dysfunction after initiation of antipsy-
chotic drugs or drugs of abuse is unknown. It is probable that the adverse effects of nico-
tine and alcohol may not appear until after years of use. Premature (early) ejaculation can
sometimes occur after cessation of opioid use. There is some evidence that disturbances in
sexual function related to substance/medication use increase with age.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There may be an interaction among cultural factors, the influence of medications on sexual
functioning, and the response of the individual to those changes.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some gender differences in sexual side effects may exist.
450 Sexual Dysfunctions
Functional Consequences of
Substance/Medication-Induced Sexual Dysfunction
Medication-induced sexual dysfunction may result in medication noncompliance.
Differential Diagnosis
Non-substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunctions. Many mental conditions, such
as depressive, bipolar, anxiety, and psychotic disorders, are associated with disturbances
of sexual function. Thus, differentiating a substance/medication-induced sexual dys-
function from a manifestation of the underlying mental disorder can be quite difficult. The
diagnosis is usually established if a close relationship between substance/medication ini-
tiation or discontinuation is observed. A clear diagnosis can be established if the problem
occurs after substance/medication initiation, dissipates with substance/medication dis-
continuation, and recurs with introduction of the same agent. Most substance/medication-in-
duced side effects occur shortly after initiation or discontinuation. Sexual side effects that
only occur after chronic use of a substance/medication may be extremely difficult to di-
agnose with certainty.
Other Specified Sexual Dysfunction
302.79 (F52.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a sexual dys-
function that cause clinically significant distress in the individual predominate but do not
meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the sexual dysfunctions diagnostic class.
The other specified sexual dysfunction category is used in situations in which the clinician
chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the cri-
teria for any specific sexual dysfunction. This is done by recording “other specified sexual
dysfunction” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “sexual aversion”).
Unspecified Sexual Dysfunction
302.70 (F52.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a sexual dys-
function that cause clinically significant distress in the individual predominate but do not
meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the sexual dysfunctions diagnostic class.
The unspecified sexual dysfunction category is used in situations in which the clinician
chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific sexual dys-
function, and includes presentations for which there is insufficient information to make a
more specific diagnosis.
Gender
Dysphoria
In this chapter, there is one overarching diagnosis of gender dysphoria, with sepa-
rate developmentally appropriate criteria sets for children and for adolescents and adults.
The area of sex and gender is highly controversial and has led to a proliferation of terms
whose meanings vary over time and within and between disciplines. An additional source
of confusion is that in English “sex” connotes both male/female and sexuality. This chapter
employs constructs and terms as they are widely used by clinicians from various disci-
plines with specialization in this area. In this chapter, sex and sexual refer to the biological
indicators of male and female (understood in the context of reproductive capacity), such
as in sex chromosomes, gonads, sex hormones, and nonambiguous internal and external
genitalia. Disorders of sex development denote conditions of inborn somatic deviations of
the reproductive tract from the norm and/or discrepancies among the biological indica-
tors of male and female. Cross-sex hormone treatment denotes the use of feminizing hor-
mones in an individual assigned male at birth based on traditional biological indicators or
the use of masculinizing hormones in an individual assigned female at birth.
The need to introduce the term gender arose with the realization that for individuals
with conflicting or ambiguous biological indicators of sex (i.e., “intersex”), the lived role in
society and/or the identification as male or female could not be uniformly associated with
or predicted from the biological indicators and, later, that some individuals develop an
identity as female or male at variance with their uniform set of classical biological indica-
tors. Thus, gender is used to denote the public (and usually legally recognized) lived role as
boy or girl, man or woman, but, in contrast to certain social constructionist theories, biolog-
ical factors are seen as contributing, in interaction with social and psychological factors, to
gender development. Gender assignment refers to the initial assignment as male or female.
This occurs usually at birth and, thereby, yields the “natal gender.” Gender-atypical refers to
somatic features or behaviors that are not typical (in a statistical sense) of individuals with
the same assigned gender in a given society and historical era; for behavior, gender-noncon-
forming is an alternative descriptive term. Gender reassignment denotes an official (and usu-
ally legal) change of gender. Gender identity is a category of social identity and refers to an
individual’s identification as male, female, or, occasionally, some category other than male
or female. Gender dysphoria as a general descriptive term refers to an individual’s affective/
cognitive discontent with the assigned gender but is more specifically defined when used
as a diagnostic category. Transgender refers to the broad spectrum of individuals who tran-
siently or persistently identify with a gender different from their natal gender. Transsexual
denotes an individual who seeks, or has undergone, a social transition from male to female
or female to male, which in many, but not all, cases also involves a somatic transition by
cross-sex hormone treatment and genital surgery (sex reassignment surgery).
Gender dysphoria refers to the distress that may accompany the incongruence between
one’s experienced or expressed gender and one’s assigned gender. Although not all indi-
viduals will experience distress as a result of such incongruence, many are distressed if the
desired physical interventions by means of hormones and/or surgery are not available.
The current term is more descriptive than the previous DSM-IV term gender identity disor-
der and focuses on dysphoria as the clinical problem, not identity per se.
451
452 Gender Dysphoria
Gender Dysphoria
Diagnostic Criteria
Gender Dysphoria in Children 302.6 (F64.2)
A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and assigned
gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least six of the following
(one of which must be Criterion A1):
1. A strong desire to be of the other gender or an insistence that one is the other gen-
der (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).
2. In boys (assigned gender), a strong preference for cross-dressing or simulating fe-
male attire; or in girls (assigned gender), a strong preference for wearing only typ-
ical masculine clothing and a strong resistance to the wearing of typical feminine
clothing.
3. A strong preference for cross-gender roles in make-believe play or fantasy play.
4. A strong preference for the toys, games, or activities stereotypically used or en-
gaged in by the other gender.
5. A strong preference for playmates of the other gender.
6. In boys (assigned gender), a strong rejection of typically masculine toys, games,
and activities and a strong avoidance of rough-and-tumble play; or in girls (as-
signed gender), a strong rejection of typically feminine toys, games, and activities.
7. A strong dislike of one’s sexual anatomy.
8. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics that match
one’s experienced gender.
B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
school, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With a disorder of sex development (e.g., a congenital adrenogenital disorder such
as 255.2 [E25.0] congenital adrenal hyperplasia or 259.50 [E34.50] androgen insensi-
tivity syndrome).
Coding note: Code the disorder of sex development as well as gender dysphoria.
Gender Dysphoria in Adolescents and Adults 302.85 (F64.1)
A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and assigned
gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least two of the following:
1. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and pri-
mary and/or secondary sex characteristics (or in young adolescents, the antici-
pated secondary sex characteristics).
2. A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or secondary sex characteristics be-
cause of a marked incongruence with one’s experienced/expressed gender (or in
young adolescents, a desire to prevent the development of the anticipated second-
ary sex characteristics).
3. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of the other
gender.
4. A strong desire to be of the other gender (or some alternative gender different from
one’s assigned gender).
5. A strong desire to be treated as the other gender (or some alternative gender dif-
ferent from one’s assigned gender).
6. A strong conviction that one has the typical feelings and reactions of the other gen-
der (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).
Gender Dysphoria 453
B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With a disorder of sex development (e.g., a congenital adrenogenital disorder such
as 255.2 [E25.0] congenital adrenal hyperplasia or 259.50 [E34.50] androgen insensi-
tivity syndrome).
Coding note: Code the disorder of sex development as well as gender dysphoria.
Specify if:
Posttransition: The individual has transitioned to full-time living in the desired gender
(with or without legalization of gender change) and has undergone (or is preparing to
have) at least one cross-sex medical procedure or treatment regimen—namely, regu-
lar cross-sex hormone treatment or gender reassignment surgery confirming the desired
gender (e.g., penectomy, vaginoplasty in a natal male; mastectomy or phalloplasty in
a natal female).
Specifiers
The posttransition specifier may be used in the context of continuing treatment procedures
that serve to support the new gender assignment.
Diagnostic Features
Individuals with gender dysphoria have a marked incongruence between the gender they
have been assigned to (usually at birth, referred to as natal gender) and their experienced/
expressed gender. This discrepancy is the core component of the diagnosis. There must
also be evidence of distress about this incongruence. Experienced gender may include al-
ternative gender identities beyond binary stereotypes. Consequently, the distress is not
limited to a desire to simply be of the other gender, but may include a desire to be of an al-
ternative gender, provided that it differs from the individual’s assigned gender.
Gender dysphoria manifests itself differently in different age groups. Prepubertal natal
girls with gender dysphoria may express the wish to be a boy, assert they are a boy, or as-
sert they will grow up to be a man. They prefer boys’ clothing and hairstyles, are often
perceived by strangers as boys, and may ask to be called by a boy’s name. Usually, they dis-
play intense negative reactions to parental attempts to have them wear dresses or other
feminine attire. Some may refuse to attend school or social events where such clothes are
required. These girls may demonstrate marked cross-gender identification in role-playing,
dreams, and fantasies. Contact sports, rough-and-tumble play, traditional boyhood games,
and boys as playmates are most often preferred. They show little interest in stereotypically
feminine toys (e.g., dolls) or activities (e.g., feminine dress-up or role-play). Occasionally,
they refuse to urinate in a sitting position. Some natal girls may express a desire to have a
penis or claim to have a penis or that they will grow one when older. They may also state that
they do not want to develop breasts or menstruate.
Prepubertal natal boys with gender dysphoria may express the wish to be a girl or as-
sert they are a girl or that they will grow up to be a woman. They have a preference for
dressing in girls’ or women’s clothes or may improvise clothing from available materials
(e.g., using towels, aprons, and scarves for long hair or skirts). These children may role-
play female figures (e.g., playing “mother”) and often are intensely interested in female
fantasy figures. Traditional feminine activities, stereotypical games, and pastimes (e.g.,
“playing house”; drawing feminine pictures; watching television or videos of favorite fe-
male characters) are most often preferred. Stereotypical female-type dolls (e.g., Barbie) are
often favorite toys, and girls are their preferred playmates. They avoid rough-and-tumble
play and competitive sports and have little interest in stereotypically masculine toys (e.g.,
cars, trucks). Some may pretend not to have a penis and insist on sitting to urinate. More
454 Gender Dysphoria
rarely, they may state that they find their penis or testes disgusting, that they wish them re-
moved, or that they have, or wish to have, a vagina.
In young adolescents with gender dysphoria, clinical features may resemble those of
children or adults with the condition, depending on developmental level. As secondary
sex characteristics of young adolescents are not yet fully developed, these individuals may
not state dislike of them, but they are concerned about imminent physical changes.
In adults with gender dysphoria, the discrepancy between experienced gender and
physical sex characteristics is often, but not always, accompanied by a desire to be rid of
primary and/or secondary sex characteristics and/or a strong desire to acquire some pri-
mary and/or secondary sex characteristics of the other gender. To varying degrees, adults
with gender dysphoria may adopt the behavior, clothing, and mannerisms of the experi-
enced gender. They feel uncomfortable being regarded by others, or functioning in soci-
ety, as members of their assigned gender. Some adults may have a strong desire to be of a
different gender and treated as such, and they may have an inner certainty to feel and re-
spond as the experienced gender without seeking medical treatment to alter body char-
acteristics. They may find other ways to resolve the incongruence between experienced/
expressed and assigned gender by partially living in the desired role or by adopting a gen-
der role neither conventionally male nor conventionally female.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
When visible signs of puberty develop, natal boys may shave their legs at the first signs of
hair growth. They sometimes bind their genitals to make erections less visible. Girls may
bind their breasts, walk with a stoop, or use loose sweaters to make breasts less visible. In-
creasingly, adolescents request, or may obtain without medical prescription and supervi-
sion, hormonal suppressors (“blockers”) of gonadal steroids (e.g., gonadotropin-releasing
hormone [GnRH] analog, spironolactone). Clinically referred adolescents often want hor-
mone treatment and many also wish for gender reassignment surgery. Adolescents living in
an accepting environment may openly express the desire to be and be treated as the experi-
enced gender and dress partly or completely as the experienced gender, have a hairstyle typ-
ical of the experienced gender, preferentially seek friendships with peers of the other gender,
and/or adopt a new first name consistent with the experienced gender. Older adolescents,
when sexually active, usually do not show or allow partners to touch their sexual organs. For
adults with an aversion toward their genitals, sexual activity is constrained by the preference
that their genitals not be seen or touched by their partners. Some adults may seek hormone
treatment (sometimes without medical prescription and supervision) and gender reassign-
ment surgery. Others are satisfied with either hormone treatment or surgery alone.
Adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria before gender reassignment are at in-
creased risk for suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and suicides. After gender reassign-
ment, adjustment may vary, and suicide risk may persist.
Prevalence
For natal adult males, prevalence ranges from 0.005% to 0.014%, and for natal females,
from 0.002% to 0.003%. Since not all adults seeking hormone treatment and surgical reas-
signment attend specialty clinics, these rates are likely modest underestimates. Sex differ-
ences in rate of referrals to specialty clinics vary by age group. In children, sex ratios of
natal boys to girls range from 2:1 to 4.5:1. In adolescents, the sex ratio is close to parity; in
adults, the sex ratio favors natal males, with ratios ranging from 1:1 to 6.1:1. In two coun-
tries, the sex ratio appears to favor natal females (Japan: 2.2:1; Poland: 3.4:1).
Development and Course
Because expression of gender dysphoria varies with age, there are separate criteria sets for
children versus adolescents and adults. Criteria for children are defined in a more con-
Gender Dysphoria 455
crete, behavioral manner than those for adolescents and adults. Many of the core criteria
draw on well-documented behavioral gender differences between typically developing
boys and girls. Young children are less likely than older children, adolescents, and adults
to express extreme and persistent anatomic dysphoria. In adolescents and adults, incon-
gruence between experienced gender and somatic sex is a central feature of the diagnosis.
Factors related to distress and impairment also vary with age. A very young child may
show signs of distress (e.g., intense crying) only when parents tell the child that he or she
is “really” not a member of the other gender but only “desires” to be. Distress may not be
manifest in social environments supportive of the child’s desire to live in the role of the
other gender and may emerge only if the desire is interfered with. In adolescents and
adults, distress may manifest because of strong incongruence between experienced gender
and somatic sex. Such distress may, however, be mitigated by supportive environments and
knowledge that biomedical treatments exist to reduce incongruence. Impairment (e.g.,
school refusal, development of depression, anxiety, and substance abuse) may be a conse-
quence of gender dysphoria.
Gender dysphoria without a disorder of sex development. For clinic-referred children,
onset of cross-gender behaviors is usually between ages 2 and 4 years. This corresponds to
the developmental time period in which most typically developing children begin ex-
pressing gendered behaviors and interests. For some preschool-age children, both perva-
sive cross-gender behaviors and the expressed desire to be the other gender may be
present, or, more rarely, labeling oneself as a member of the other gender may occur. In
some cases, the expressed desire to be the other gender appears later, usually at entry into
elementary school. A small minority of children express discomfort with their sexual anat-
omy or will state the desire to have a sexual anatomy corresponding to the experienced
gender (“anatomic dysphoria”). Expressions of anatomic dysphoria become more com-
mon as children with gender dysphoria approach and anticipate puberty.
Rates of persistence of gender dysphoria from childhood into adolescence or adulthood
vary. In natal males, persistence has ranged from 2.2% to 30%. In natal females, persistence
has ranged from 12% to 50%. Persistence of gender dysphoria is modestly correlated with
dimensional measures of severity ascertained at the time of a childhood baseline assess-
ment. In one sample of natal males, lower socioeconomic background was also modestly
correlated with persistence. It is unclear if particular therapeutic approaches to gender
dysphoria in children are related to rates of long-term persistence. Extant follow-up sam-
ples consisted of children receiving no formal therapeutic intervention or receiving ther-
apeutic interventions of various types, ranging from active efforts to reduce gender
dysphoria to a more neutral, “watchful waiting” approach. It is unclear if children “en-
couraged” or supported to live socially in the desired gender will show higher rates of per-
sistence, since such children have not yet been followed longitudinally in a systematic
manner. For both natal male and female children showing persistence, almost all are
sexually attracted to individuals of their natal sex. For natal male children whose gender
dysphoria does not persist, the majority are androphilic (sexually attracted to males) and of-
ten self-identify as gay or homosexual (ranging from 63% to 100%). In natal female chil-
dren whose gender dysphoria does not persist, the percentage who are gynephilic (sexually
attracted to females) and self-identify as lesbian is lower (ranging from 32% to 50%).
In both adolescent and adult natal males, there are two broad trajectories for develop-
ment of gender dysphoria: early onset and late onset. Early-onset gender dysphoria starts in
childhood and continues into adolescence and adulthood; or, there is an intermittent pe-
riod in which the gender dysphoria desists and these individuals self-identify as gay or ho-
mosexual, followed by recurrence of gender dysphoria. Late-onset gender dysphoria occurs
around puberty or much later in life. Some of these individuals report having had a desire
to be of the other gender in childhood that was not expressed verbally to others. Others do
not recall any signs of childhood gender dysphoria. For adolescent males with late-onset
gender dysphoria, parents often report surprise because they did not see signs of gender
456 Gender Dysphoria
dysphoria during childhood. Expressions of anatomic dysphoria are more common and
salient in adolescents and adults once secondary sex characteristics have developed.
Adolescent and adult natal males with early-onset gender dysphoria are almost al-
ways sexually attracted to men (androphilic). Adolescents and adults with late-onset gen-
der dysphoria frequently engage in transvestic behavior with sexual excitement. The
majority of these individuals are gynephilic or sexually attracted to other posttransition
natal males with late-onset gender dysphoria. A substantial percentage of adult males
with late-onset gender dysphoria cohabit with or are married to natal females. After gen-
der transition, many self-identify as lesbian. Among adult natal males with gender dyspho-
ria, the early-onset group seeks out clinical care for hormone treatment and reassignment
surgery at an earlier age than does the late-onset group. The late-onset group may have more
fluctuations in the degree of gender dysphoria and be more ambivalent about and less
likely satisfied after gender reassignment surgery.
In both adolescent and adult natal females, the most common course is the early-onset
form of gender dysphoria. The late-onset form is much less common in natal females com-
pared with natal males. As in natal males with gender dysphoria, there may have been a
period in which the gender dysphoria desisted and these individuals self-identified as les-
bian; however, with recurrence of gender dysphoria, clinical consultation is sought, often
with the desire for hormone treatment and reassignment surgery. Parents of natal adoles-
cent females with the late-onset form also report surprise, as no signs of childhood gender
dysphoria were evident. Expressions of anatomic dysphoria are much more common and
salient in adolescents and adults than in children.
Adolescent and adult natal females with early-onset gender dysphoria are almost
always gynephilic. Adolescents and adults with the late-onset form of gender dysphoria
are usually androphilic and after gender transition self-identify as gay men. Natal females
with the late-onset form do not have co-occurring transvestic behavior with sexual ex-
citement.
Gender dysphoria in association with a disorder of sex development. Most individuals
with a disorder of sex development who develop gender dysphoria have already come to
medical attention at an early age. For many, starting at birth, issues of gender assignment
were raised by physicians and parents. Moreover, as infertility is quite common for this
group, physicians are more willing to perform cross-sex hormone treatments and genital
surgery before adulthood.
Disorders of sex development in general are frequently associated with gender-atypi-
cal behavior starting in early childhood. However, in the majority of cases, this does not
lead to gender dysphoria. As individuals with a disorder of sex development become
aware of their medical history and condition, many experience uncertainty about their
gender, as opposed to developing a firm conviction that they are another gender. How-
ever, most do not progress to gender transition. Gender dysphoria and gender transition
may vary considerably as a function of a disorder of sex development, its severity, and as-
signed gender.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. For individuals with gender dysphoria without a disorder of sex de-
velopment, atypical gender behavior among individuals with early-onset gender dyspho-
ria develops in early preschool age, and it is possible that a high degree of atypicality
makes the development of gender dysphoria and its persistence into adolescence and
adulthood more likely.
Environmental. Among individuals with gender dysphoria without a disorder of sex de-
velopment, males with gender dysphoria (in both childhood and adolescence) more com-
monly have older brothers than do males without the condition. Additional predisposing
Gender Dysphoria 457
factors under consideration, especially in individuals with late-onset gender dysphoria (ad-
olescence, adulthood), include habitual fetishistic transvestism developing into autogyne-
philia (i.e., sexual arousal associated with the thought or image of oneself as a woman) and
other forms of more general social, psychological, or developmental problems.
Genetic and physiological. For individuals with gender dysphoria without a disorder of
sex development, some genetic contribution is suggested by evidence for (weak) familial-
ity of transsexualism among nontwin siblings, increased concordance for transsexualism
in monozygotic compared with dizygotic same-sex twins, and some degree of heritability
of gender dysphoria. As to endocrine findings, no endogenous systemic abnormalities in
sex-hormone levels have been found in 46,XY individuals, whereas there appear to be in-
creased androgen levels (in the range found in hirsute women but far below normal male
levels) in 46,XX individuals. Overall, current evidence is insufficient to label gender dys-
phoria without a disorder of sex development as a form of intersexuality limited to the cen-
tral nervous system.
In gender dysphoria associated with a disorder of sex development, the likelihood of
later gender dysphoria is increased if prenatal production and utilization (via receptor
sensitivity) of androgens are grossly atypical relative to what is usually seen in individuals
with the same assigned gender. Examples include 46,XY individuals with a history of nor-
mal male prenatal hormone milieu but inborn nonhormonal genital defects (as in cloacal
bladder exstrophy or penile agenesis) and who have been assigned to the female gender.
The likelihood of gender dysphoria is further enhanced by additional, prolonged, highly
gender-atypical postnatal androgen exposure with somatic virilization as may occur in fe-
male-raised and noncastrated 46,XY individuals with 5-alpha reductase-2 deficiency or
17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 deficiency or in female-raised 46,XX individuals
with classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia with prolonged periods of non-adherence to
glucocorticoid replacement therapy. However, the prenatal androgen milieu is more
closely related to gendered behavior than to gender identity. Many individuals with dis-
orders of sex development and markedly gender-atypical behavior do not develop gender
dysphoria. Thus, gender-atypical behavior by itself should not be interpreted as an indi-
cator of current or future gender dysphoria. There appears to be a higher rate of gender
dysphoria and patient-initiated gender change from assigned female to male than from as-
signed male to female in 46,XY individuals with a disorder of sex development.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals with gender dysphoria have been reported across many countries and cul-
tures. The equivalent of gender dysphoria has also been reported in individuals living in
cultures with institutionalized gender categories other than male or female. It is unclear
whether with these individuals the diagnostic criteria for gender dysphoria would be met.
Diagnostic Markers
Individuals with a somatic disorder of sex development show some correlation of final
gender identity outcome with the degree of prenatal androgen production and utilization.
However, the correlation is not robust enough for the biological factor, where ascertain-
able, to replace a detailed and comprehensive diagnostic interview evaluation for gender
dysphoria.
Functional Consequences of Gender Dysphoria
Preoccupation with cross-gender wishes may develop at all ages after the first 2–3 years of
childhood and often interfere with daily activities. In older children, failure to develop
age-typical same-sex peer relationships and skills may lead to isolation from peer groups
and to distress. Some children may refuse to attend school because of teasing and harass-
458 Gender Dysphoria
ment or pressure to dress in attire associated with their assigned sex. Also in adolescents
and adults, preoccupation with cross-gender wishes often interferes with daily activities.
Relationship difficulties, including sexual relationship problems, are common, and func-
tioning at school or at work may be impaired. Gender dysphoria, along with atypical
gender expression, is associated with high levels of stigmatization, discrimination, and
victimization, leading to negative self-concept, increased rates of mental disorder comor-
bidity, school dropout, and economic marginalization, including unemployment, with at-
tendant social and mental health risks, especially in individuals from resource-poor family
backgrounds. In addition, these individuals’ access to health services and mental health
services may be impeded by structural barriers, such as institutional discomfort or inex-
perience in working with this patient population.
Differential Diagnosis
Nonconformity to gender roles. Gender dysphoria should be distinguished from sim-
ple nonconformity to stereotypical gender role behavior by the strong desire to be of an-
other gender than the assigned one and by the extent and pervasiveness of gender-variant
activities and interests. The diagnosis is not meant to merely describe nonconformity to
stereotypical gender role behavior (e.g., “tomboyism” in girls, “girly-boy” behavior in
boys, occasional cross-dressing in adult men). Given the increased openness of atypical
gender expressions by individuals across the entire range of the transgender spectrum, it
is important that the clinical diagnosis be limited to those individuals whose distress and
impairment meet the specified criteria.
Transvestic disorder. Transvestic disorder occurs in heterosexual (or bisexual) adoles-
cent and adult males (rarely in females) for whom cross-dressing behavior generates sex-
ual excitement and causes distress and/or impairment without drawing their primary
gender into question. It is occasionally accompanied by gender dysphoria. An individual
with transvestic disorder who also has clinically significant gender dysphoria can be given
both diagnoses. In many cases of late-onset gender dysphoria in gynephilic natal males,
transvestic behavior with sexual excitement is a precursor.
Body dysmorphic disorder. An individual with body dysmorphic disorder focuses on
the alteration or removal of a specific body part because it is perceived as abnormally formed,
not because it represents a repudiated assigned gender. When an individual’s presenta-
tion meets criteria for both gender dysphoria and body dysmorphic disorder, both diag-
noses can be given. Individuals wishing to have a healthy limb amputated (termed by
some body integrity identity disorder) because it makes them feel more “complete” usually
do not wish to change gender, but rather desire to live as an amputee or a disabled person.
Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. In schizophrenia, there may rarely be
delusions of belonging to some other gender. In the absence of psychotic symptoms, in-
sistence by an individual with gender dysphoria that he or she is of some other gender is
not considered a delusion. Schizophrenia (or other psychotic disorders) and gender dys-
phoria may co-occur.
Other clinical presentations. Some individuals with an emasculinization desire who
develop an alternative, nonmale/nonfemale gender identity do have a presentation that
meets criteria for gender dysphoria. However, some males seek castration and/or penec-
tomy for aesthetic reasons or to remove psychological effects of androgens without chang-
ing male identity; in these cases, the criteria for gender dysphoria are not met.
Comorbidity
Clinically referred children with gender dysphoria show elevated levels of emotional and
behavioral problems—most commonly, anxiety, disruptive and impulse-control, and de-
Other Specified Gender Dysphoria 459
pressive disorders. In prepubertal children, increasing age is associated with having more
behavioral or emotional problems; this is related to the increasing non-acceptance of gen-
der-variant behavior by others. In older children, gender-variant behavior often leads to
peer ostracism, which may lead to more behavioral problems. The prevalence of mental
health problems differs among cultures; these differences may also be related to differences
in attitudes toward gender variance in children. However, also in some non-Western cul-
tures, anxiety has been found to be relatively common in individuals with gender dysphoria,
even in cultures with accepting attitudes toward gender-variant behavior. Autism spec-
trum disorder is more prevalent in clinically referred children with gender dysphoria than
in the general population. Clinically referred adolescents with gender dysphoria appear to
have comorbid mental disorders, with anxiety and depressive disorders being the most
common. As in children, autism spectrum disorder is more prevalent in clinically referred
adolescents with gender dysphoria than in the general population. Clinically referred
adults with gender dysphoria may have coexisting mental health problems, most commonly
anxiety and depressive disorders.
Other Specified Gender Dysphoria
302.6 (F64.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of gender dys-
phoria that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for gender dys-
phoria. The other specified gender dysphoria category is used in situations in which the
clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet
the criteria for gender dysphoria. This is done by recording “other specified gender dys-
phoria” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “brief gender dysphoria”).
An example of a presentation that can be specified using the “other specified” desig-
nation is the following:
The current disturbance meets symptom criteria for gender dysphoria, but the
duration is less than 6 months.
Unspecified Gender Dysphoria
302.6 (F64.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of gender dys-
phoria that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or oth-
er important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for gender
dysphoria. The unspecified gender dysphoria category is used in situations in which the
clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for gender dyspho-
ria, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more
specific diagnosis.
This page intentionally left blank
Disruptive, Impulse-Control,
and Conduct Disorders
Disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders include conditions involv-
ing problems in the self-control of emotions and behaviors. While other disorders in DSM-
5 may also involve problems in emotional and/or behavioral regulation, the disorders in
this chapter are unique in that these problems are manifested in behaviors that violate the
rights of others (e.g., aggression, destruction of property) and/or that bring the individual
into significant conflict with societal norms or authority figures. The underlying causes of
the problems in the self-control of emotions and behaviors can vary greatly across the dis-
orders in this chapter and among individuals within a given diagnostic category.
The chapter includes oppositional defiant disorder, intermittent explosive disorder, con-
duct disorder, antisocial personality disorder (which is described in the chapter “Personality
Disorders”), pyromania, kleptomania, and other specified and unspecified disruptive, im-
pulse-control, and conduct disorders. Although all the disorders in the chapter involve
problems in both emotional and behavioral regulation, the source of variation among the
disorders is the relative emphasis on problems in the two types of self-control. For example,
the criteria for conduct disorder focus largely on poorly controlled behaviors that violate the
rights of others or that violate major societal norms. Many of the behavioral symptoms (e.g.,
aggression) can be a result of poorly controlled emotions such as anger. At the other extreme,
the criteria for intermittent explosive disorder focus largely on such poorly controlled emo-
tion, outbursts of anger that are disproportionate to the interpersonal or other provocation
or to other psychosocial stressors. Intermediate in impact to these two disorders is opposi-
tional defiant disorder, in which the criteria are more evenly distributed between emotions
(anger and irritation) and behaviors (argumentativeness and defiance). Pyromania and
kleptomania are less commonly used diagnoses characterized by poor impulse control re-
lated to specific behaviors (fire setting or stealing) that relieve internal tension. Other speci-
fied disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder is a category for conditions in which
there are symptoms of conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or other disruptive,
impulse-control, and conduct disorders, but the number of symptoms does not meet the di-
agnostic threshold for any of the disorders in this chapter, even though there is evidence of
clinically significant impairment associated with the symptoms.
The disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders all tend to be more common in
males than in females, although the relative degree of male predominance may differ both
across disorders and within a disorder at different ages. The disorders in this chapter tend to
have first onset in childhood or adolescence. In fact, it is very rare for either conduct disorder or
oppositional defiant disorder to first emerge in adulthood. There is a developmental relation-
ship between oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder, in that most cases of con-
duct disorder previously would have met criteria for oppositional defiant disorder, at least in
those cases in which conduct disorder emerges prior to adolescence. However, most children
with oppositional defiant disorder do not eventually develop conduct disorder. Furthermore,
children with oppositional defiant disorder are at risk for eventually developing other prob-
lems besides conduct disorder, including anxiety and depressive disorders.
Many of the symptoms that define the disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disor-
ders are behaviors that can occur to some degree in typically developing individuals.
Thus, it is critical that the frequency, persistence, pervasiveness across situations, and im-
461
462 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
pairment associated with the behaviors indicative of the diagnosis be considered relative
to what is normative for a person’s age, gender, and culture when determining if they are
symptomatic of a disorder.
The disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders have been linked to a common
externalizing spectrum associated with the personality dimensions labeled as disinhibition
and (inversely) constraint and, to a lesser extent, negative emotionality. These shared per-
sonality dimensions could account for the high level of comorbidity among these disorders
and their frequent comorbidity with substance use disorders and antisocial personality
disorder. However, the specific nature of the shared diathesis that constitutes the exter-
nalizing spectrum remains unknown.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 313.81 (F91.3)
A. A pattern of angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, or vindictiveness lasting
at least 6 months as evidenced by at least four symptoms from any of the following cate-
gories, and exhibited during interaction with at least one individual who is not a sibling.
Angry/Irritable Mood
1. Often loses temper.
2. Is often touchy or easily annoyed.
3. Is often angry and resentful.
Argumentative/Defiant Behavior
4. Often argues with authority figures or, for children and adolescents, with adults.
5. Often actively defies or refuses to comply with requests from authority figures or
with rules.
6. Often deliberately annoys others.
7. Often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehavior.
Vindictiveness
8. Has been spiteful or vindictive at least twice within the past 6 months.
Note: The persistence and frequency of these behaviors should be used to distinguish
a behavior that is within normal limits from a behavior that is symptomatic. For children
younger than 5 years, the behavior should occur on most days for a period of at least
6 months unless otherwise noted (Criterion A8). For individuals 5 years or older, the
behavior should occur at least once per week for at least 6 months, unless otherwise
noted (Criterion A8). While these frequency criteria provide guidance on a minimal lev-
el of frequency to define symptoms, other factors should also be considered, such as
whether the frequency and intensity of the behaviors are outside a range that is nor-
mative for the individual’s developmental level, gender, and culture.
B. The disturbance in behavior is associated with distress in the individual or others in his or
her immediate social context (e.g., family, peer group, work colleagues), or it impacts neg-
atively on social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during the course of a psychotic, substance
use, depressive, or bipolar disorder. Also, the criteria are not met for disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder.
Specify current severity:
Mild: Symptoms are confined to only one setting (e.g., at home, at school, at work, with
peers).
Oppositional Defiant Disorder 463
Moderate: Some symptoms are present in at least two settings.
Severe: Some symptoms are present in three or more settings.
Specifiers
It is not uncommon for individuals with oppositional defiant disorder to show symptoms
only at home and only with family members. However, the pervasiveness of the symp-
toms is an indicator of the severity of the disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of oppositional defiant disorder is a frequent and persistent pattern
of angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, or vindictiveness (Criterion
A). It is not unusual for individuals with oppositional defiant disorder to show the behav-
ioral features of the disorder without problems of negative mood. However, individuals
with the disorder who show the angry/irritable mood symptoms typically show the be-
havioral features as well.
The symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder may be confined to only one setting,
and this is most frequently the home. Individuals who show enough symptoms to meet
the diagnostic threshold, even if it is only at home, may be significantly impaired in their
social functioning. However, in more severe cases, the symptoms of the disorder are pres-
ent in multiple settings. Given that the pervasiveness of symptoms is an indicator of the
severity of the disorder, it is critical that the individual’s behavior be assessed across mul-
tiple settings and relationships. Because these behaviors are common among siblings, they
must be observed during interactions with persons other than siblings. Also, because
symptoms of the disorder are typically more evident in interactions with adults or peers
whom the individual knows well, they may not be apparent during a clinical examination.
The symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder can occur to some degree in individu-
als without this disorder. There are several key considerations for determining if the be-
haviors are symptomatic of oppositional defiant disorder. First, the diagnostic threshold
of four or more symptoms within the preceding 6 months must be met. Second, the per-
sistence and frequency of the symptoms should exceed what is normative for an individ-
ual’s age, gender, and culture. For example, it is not unusual for preschool children to
show temper tantrums on a weekly basis. Temper outbursts for a preschool child would be
considered a symptom of oppositional defiant disorder only if they occurred on most days
for the preceding 6 months, if they occurred with at least three other symptoms of the dis-
order, and if the temper outbursts contributed to the significant impairment associated
with the disorder (e.g., led to destruction of property during outbursts, resulted in the
child being asked to leave a preschool).
The symptoms of the disorder often are part of a pattern of problematic interactions
with others. Furthermore, individuals with this disorder typically do not regard themselves
as angry, oppositional, or defiant. Instead, they often justify their behavior as a response to
unreasonable demands or circumstances. Thus, it can be difficult to disentangle the rela-
tive contribution of the individual with the disorder to the problematic interactions he or
she experiences. For example, children with oppositional defiant disorder may have ex-
perienced a history of hostile parenting, and it is often impossible to determine if the
child’s behavior caused the parents to act in a more hostile manner toward the child, if the
parents’ hostility led to the child’s problematic behavior, or if there was some combination
of both. Whether or not the clinician can separate the relative contributions of potential
causal factors should not influence whether or not the diagnosis is made. In the event that
the child may be living in particularly poor conditions where neglect or mistreatment may
occur (e.g., in institutional settings), clinical attention to reducing the contribution of the
environment may be helpful.
464 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
In children and adolescents, oppositional defiant disorder is more prevalent in families in
which child care is disrupted by a succession of different caregivers or in families in which
harsh, inconsistent, or neglectful child-rearing practices are common. Two of the most
common co-occurring conditions with oppositional defiant disorder are attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and conduct disorder (see the section “Comorbidity” for
this disorder). Oppositional defiant disorder has been associated with increased risk for
suicide attempts, even after comorbid disorders are controlled for.
Prevalence
The prevalence of oppositional defiant disorder ranges from 1% to 11%, with an average
prevalence estimate of around 3.3%. The rate of oppositional defiant disorder may vary
depending on the age and gender of the child. The disorder appears to be somewhat more
prevalent in males than in females (1.4:1) prior to adolescence. This male predominance is
not consistently found in samples of adolescents or adults.
Development and Course
The first symptoms of oppositional defiant disorder usually appear during the preschool
years and rarely later than early adolescence. Oppositional defiant disorder often precedes
the development of conduct disorder, especially for those with the childhood-onset type
of conduct disorder. However, many children and adolescents with oppositional defiant
disorder do not subsequently develop conduct disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder
also conveys risk for the development of anxiety disorders and major depressive disorder,
even in the absence of conduct disorder. The defiant, argumentative, and vindictive symp-
toms carry most of the risk for conduct disorder, whereas the angry-irritable mood symp-
toms carry most of the risk for emotional disorders.
Manifestations of the disorder across development appear consistent. Children and
adolescents with oppositional defiant disorder are at increased risk for a number of prob-
lems in adjustment as adults, including antisocial behavior, impulse-control problems,
substance abuse, anxiety, and depression.
Many of the behaviors associated with oppositional defiant disorder increase in fre-
quency during the preschool period and in adolescence. Thus, it is especially critical dur-
ing these development periods that the frequency and intensity of these behaviors be
evaluated against normative levels before it is decided that they are symptoms of opposi-
tional defiant disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Features
Temperamental. Temperamental factors related to problems in emotional regulation
(e.g., high levels of emotional reactivity, poor frustration tolerance) have been predictive
of the disorder.
Environmental. Harsh, inconsistent, or neglectful child-rearing practices are common in
families of children and adolescents with oppositional defiant disorder, and these parent-
ing practices play an important role in many causal theories of the disorder.
Genetic and physiological. A number of neurobiological markers (e.g., lower heart rate
and skin conductance reactivity; reduced basal cortisol reactivity; abnormalities in the pre-
frontal cortex and amygdala) have been associated with oppositional defiant disorder.
However, the vast majority of studies have not separated children with oppositional de-
fiant disorder from those with conduct disorder. Thus, it is unclear whether there are
markers specific to oppositional defiant disorder.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder 465
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The prevalence of the disorder in children and adolescents is relatively consistent across
countries that differ in race and ethnicity.
Functional Consequences of
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
When oppositional defiant disorder is persistent throughout development, individuals
with the disorder experience frequent conflicts with parents, teachers, supervisors, peers,
and romantic partners. Such problems often result in significant impairments in the indi-
vidual’s emotional, social, academic, and occupational adjustment.
Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder. Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder are both related
to conduct problems that bring the individual in conflict with adults and other authority
figures (e.g., teachers, work supervisors). The behaviors of oppositional defiant disorder
are typically of a less severe nature than those of conduct disorder and do not include ag-
gression toward people or animals, destruction of property, or a pattern of theft or deceit.
Furthermore, oppositional defiant disorder includes problems of emotional dysregulation
(i.e., angry and irritable mood) that are not included in the definition of conduct disorder.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. ADHD is often comorbid with oppositional de-
fiant disorder. To make the additional diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder, it is impor-
tant to determine that the individual’s failure to conform to requests of others is not solely in
situations that demand sustained effort and attention or demand that the individual sit still.
Depressive and bipolar disorders. Depressive and bipolar disorders often involve neg-
ative affect and irritability. As a result, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder should
not be made if the symptoms occur exclusively during the course of a mood disorder.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder shares with dis-
ruptive mood dysregulation disorder the symptoms of chronic negative mood and temper
outbursts. However, the severity, frequency, and chronicity of temper outbursts are more
severe in individuals with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder than in those with
oppositional defiant disorder. Thus, only a minority of children and adolescents whose
symptoms meet criteria for oppositional defiant disorder would also be diagnosed with dis-
ruptive mood dysregulation disorder. When the mood disturbance is severe enough to meet
criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant dis-
order is not given, even if all criteria for oppositional defiant disorder are met.
Intermittent explosive disorder. Intermittent explosive disorder also involves high
rates of anger. However, individuals with this disorder show serious aggression toward
others that is not part of the definition of oppositional defiant disorder.
Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder). In individuals with intel-
lectual disability, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is given only if the opposi-
tional behavior is markedly greater than is commonly observed among individuals of
comparable mental age and with comparable severity of intellectual disability.
Language disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder must also be distinguished from a
failure to follow directions that is the result of impaired language comprehension (e.g.,
hearing loss).
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia). Oppositional defiant disorder must also be dis-
tinguished from defiance due to fear of negative evaluation associated with social anxiety
disorder.
466 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Comorbidity
Rates of oppositional defiant disorder are much higher in samples of children, adoles-
cents, and adults with ADHD, and this may be the result of shared temperamental risk fac-
tors. Also, oppositional defiant disorder often precedes conduct disorder, although this
appears to be most common in children with the childhood-onset subtype. Individuals
with oppositional defiant disorder are also at increased risk for anxiety disorders and ma-
jor depressive disorder, and this seems largely attributable to the presence of the angry-
irritable mood symptoms. Adolescents and adults with oppositional defiant disorder also
show a higher rate of substance use disorders, although it is unclear if this association is in-
dependent of the comorbidity with conduct disorder.
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 312.34 (F63.81)
A. Recurrent behavioral outbursts representing a failure to control aggressive impulses
as manifested by either of the following:
1. Verbal aggression (e.g., temper tantrums, tirades, verbal arguments or fights) or
physical aggression toward property, animals, or other individuals, occurring twice
weekly, on average, for a period of 3 months. The physical aggression does not re-
sult in damage or destruction of property and does not result in physical injury to
animals or other individuals.
2. Three behavioral outbursts involving damage or destruction of property and/or
physical assault involving physical injury against animals or other individuals occur-
ring within a 12-month period.
B. The magnitude of aggressiveness expressed during the recurrent outbursts is grossly
out of proportion to the provocation or to any precipitating psychosocial stressors.
C. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not premeditated (i.e., they are impulsive and/
or anger-based) and are not committed to achieve some tangible objective (e.g.,
money, power, intimidation).
D. The recurrent aggressive outbursts cause either marked distress in the individual or
impairment in occupational or interpersonal functioning, or are associated with finan-
cial or legal consequences.
E. F. Chronological age is at least 6 years (or equivalent developmental level).
The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not better explained by another mental disor-
der (e.g., major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder, a psychotic disorder, antisocial personality disorder, borderline personality
disorder) and are not attributable to another medical condition (e.g., head trauma, Alz-
heimer’s disease) or to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication). For children ages 6–18 years, aggressive behavior that occurs as part
of an adjustment disorder should not be considered for this diagnosis.
Note: This diagnosis can be made in addition to the diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyper-
activity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or autism spectrum dis-
order when recurrent impulsive aggressive outbursts are in excess of those usually seen
in these disorders and warrant independent clinical attention.
Diagnostic Features
The impulsive (or anger-based) aggressive outbursts in intermittent explosive disorder have
a rapid onset and, typically, little or no prodromal period. Outbursts typically last for less
Intermittent Explosive Disorder 467
than 30 minutes and commonly occur in response to a minor provocation by a close intimate
or associate. Individuals with intermittent explosive disorder often have less severe epi-
sodes of verbal and/or nondamaging, nondestructive, or noninjurious physical assault (Cri-
terion A1) in between more severe destructive/assaultive episodes (Criterion A2). Criterion
A1 defines frequent (i.e., twice weekly, on average, for a period of 3 months) aggressive out-
bursts characterized by temper tantrums, tirades, verbal arguments or fights, or assault
without damage to objects or without injury to animals or other individuals. Criterion A2
defines infrequent (i.e., three in a 1-year period) impulsive aggressive outbursts character-
ized by damaging or destroying an object, regardless of its tangible value, or by assaulting/
striking or otherwise causing physical injury to an animal or to another individual. Regard-
less of the nature of the impulsive aggressive outburst, the core feature of intermittent
explosive disorder is failure to control impulsive aggressive behavior in response to subjec-
tively experienced provocation (i.e., psychosocial stressor) that would not typically result in
an aggressive outburst (Criterion B). The aggressive outbursts are generally impulsive and/
or anger-based, rather than premeditated or instrumental (Criterion C) and are associated
with significant distress or impairment in psychosocial function (Criterion D). A diagnosis
of intermittent explosive disorder should not be given to individuals younger than 6 years,
or the equivalent developmental level (Criterion E), or to individuals whose aggressive out-
bursts are better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion F). A diagnosis of intermit-
tent explosive disorder should not be given to individuals with disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder or to individuals whose impulsive aggressive outbursts are attribut-
able to another medical condition or to the physiological effects of a substance (Criterion F).
In addition, children ages 6–18 years should not receive this diagnosis when impulsive ag-
gressive outbursts occur in the context of an adjustment disorder (Criterion F).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Mood disorders (unipolar), anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders are associated
with intermittent explosive disorder, although onset of these disorders is typically later
than that of intermittent explosive disorder.
Prevalence
One-year prevalence data for intermittent explosive disorder in the United States is about
2.7% (narrow definition). Intermittent explosive disorder is more prevalent among
younger individuals (e.g., younger than 35–40 years), compared with older individuals
(older than 50 years), and in individuals with a high school education or less.
Development and Course
The onset of recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive behavior is most common in late
childhood or adolescence and rarely begins for the first time after age 40 years. The core
features of intermittent explosive disorder, typically, are persistent and continue for many
years.
The course of the disorder may be episodic, with recurrent periods of impulsive ag-
gressive outbursts. Intermittent explosive disorder appears to follow a chronic and persis-
tent course over many years. It also appears to be quite common regardless of the presence
or absence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or disruptive, impulse-
control, and conduct disorders (e.g., conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Individuals with a history of physical and emotional trauma during the
first two decades of life are at increased risk for intermittent explosive disorder.
468 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Genetic and physiological. First-degree relatives of individuals with intermittent ex-
plosive disorder are at increased risk for intermittent explosive disorder, and twin studies
have demonstrated a substantial genetic influence for impulsive aggression.
Research provides neurobiological support for the presence of serotonergic abnormal-
ities, globally and in the brain, specifically in areas of the limbic system (anterior cingulate)
and orbitofrontal cortex in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder. Amygdala
responses to anger stimuli, during functional magnetic resonance imaging scanning, are
greater in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder compared with healthy indi-
viduals.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The lower prevalence of intermittent explosive disorder in some regions (Asia, Middle
East) or countries (Romania, Nigeria), compared with the United States, suggests that in-
formation about recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive behaviors either is not elic-
ited on questioning or is less likely to be present, because of cultural factors.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In some studies the prevalence of intermittent explosive disorder is greater in males than
in females (odds ratio = 1.4–2.3); other studies have found no gender difference.
Functional Consequences of
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Social (e.g., loss of friends, relatives, marital instability), occupational (e.g., demotion, loss
of employment), financial (e.g., due to value of objects destroyed), and legal (e.g., civil
suits as a result of aggressive behavior against person or property; criminal charges for as-
sault) problems often develop as a result of intermittent explosive disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not be made when Criteria A1 and/
or A2 are only met during an episode of another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive
disorder, bipolar disorder, psychotic disorder), or when impulsive aggressive outbursts
are attributable to another medical condition or to the physiological effects of a substance
or medication. This diagnosis also should not be made, particularly in children and ado-
lescents ages 6–18 years, when the impulsive aggressive outbursts occur in the context of
an adjustment disorder. Other examples in which recurrent, problematic, impulsive ag-
gressive outbursts may, or may not, be diagnosed as intermittent explosive disorder in-
clude the following.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. In contrast to intermittent explosive disorder,
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is characterized by a persistently negative mood state
(i.e., irritability, anger) most of the day, nearly every day, between impulsive aggressive out-
bursts. A diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder can only be given when the on-
set of recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive outbursts is before age 10 years. Finally, a
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should not be made for the first time
after age 18 years. Otherwise, these diagnoses are mutually exclusive.
Antisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder. Individuals with an-
tisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder often display recurrent,
problematic impulsive aggressive outbursts. However, the level of impulsive aggression
in individuals with antisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder is
lower than that in individuals with intermittent explosive disorder.
Conduct Disorder 469
Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, and personality change due to another med-
ical condition, aggressive type. A diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder should not
be made when aggressive outbursts are judged to result from the physiological effects of an-
other diagnosable medical condition (e.g., brain injury associated with a change in personality
characterized by aggressive outbursts; complex partial epilepsy). Nonspecific abnormalities
on neurological examination (e.g., “soft signs”) and nonspecific electroencephalographic
changes are compatible with a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder unless there is a di-
agnosable medical condition that better explains the impulsive aggressive outbursts.
Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal. A diagnosis of intermittent explosive
disorder should not be made when impulsive aggressive outbursts are nearly always as-
sociated with intoxication with or withdrawal from substances (e.g., alcohol, phencyclidine,
cocaine and other stimulants, barbiturates, inhalants). However, when a sufficient number
of impulsive aggressive outbursts also occur in the absence of substance intoxication or
withdrawal, and these warrant independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of intermittent
explosive disorder may be given.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disor-
der, or autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with any of these childhood-onset dis-
orders may exhibit impulsive aggressive outbursts. Individuals with ADHD are typically
impulsive and, as a result, may also exhibit impulsive aggressive outbursts. While indi-
viduals with conduct disorder can exhibit impulsive aggressive outbursts, the form of ag-
gression characterized by the diagnostic criteria is proactive and predatory. Aggression in
oppositional defiant disorder is typically characterized by temper tantrums and verbal ar-
guments with authority figures, whereas impulsive aggressive outbursts in intermittent
explosive disorder are in response to a broader array of provocation and include physical
assault. The level of impulsive aggression in individuals with a history of one or more of
these disorders has been reported as lower than that in comparable individuals whose
symptoms also meet intermittent explosive disorder Criteria A through E. Accordingly, if
Criteria A through E are also met, and the impulsive aggressive outbursts warrant inde-
pendent clinical attention, a diagnosis of intermittent explosive disorder may be given.
Comorbidity
Depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders are most commonly
comorbid with intermittent explosive disorder. In addition, individuals with antisocial
personality disorder or borderline personality disorder, and individuals with a history of
disorders with disruptive behaviors (e.g., ADHD, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant
disorder), are at greater risk for comorbid intermittent explosive disorder.
Conduct Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which the basic rights of others or ma-
jor age-appropriate societal norms or rules are violated, as manifested by the presence
of at least three of the following 15 criteria in the past 12 months from any of the cate-
gories below, with at least one criterion present in the past 6 months:
Aggression to People and Animals
1. Often bullies, threatens, or intimidates others.
2. Often initiates physical fights.
3. Has used a weapon that can cause serious physical harm to others (e.g., a bat,
brick, broken bottle, knife, gun).
470 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
4. 5. Has been physically cruel to people.
Has been physically cruel to animals.
6. Has stolen while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse snatching, extortion,
armed robbery).
7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. Has forced someone into sexual activity.
Destruction of Property
Has deliberately engaged in fire setting with the intention of causing serious damage.
Has deliberately destroyed others’ property (other than by fire setting).
Deceitfulness or Theft
Has broken into someone else’s house, building, or car.
Often lies to obtain goods or favors or to avoid obligations (i.e., “cons” others).
Has stolen items of nontrivial value without confronting a victim (e.g., shoplifting,
but without breaking and entering; forgery).
Serious Violations of Rules
13. 14. Often stays out at night despite parental prohibitions, beginning before age 13 years.
Has run away from home overnight at least twice while living in the parental or pa-
rental surrogate home, or once without returning for a lengthy period.
15. Is often truant from school, beginning before age 13 years.
B. The disturbance in behavior causes clinically significant impairment in social, aca-
demic, or occupational functioning.
C. If the individual is age 18 years or older, criteria are not met for antisocial personality
disorder.
Specify whether:
312.81 (F91.1) Childhood-onset type: Individuals show at least one symptom char-
acteristic of conduct disorder prior to age 10 years.
312.82 (F91.2) Adolescent-onset type: Individuals show no symptom characteristic
of conduct disorder prior to age 10 years.
312.89 (F91.9) Unspecified onset: Criteria for a diagnosis of conduct disorder are
met, but there is not enough information available to determine whether the onset of
the first symptom was before or after age 10 years.
Specify if:
With limited prosocial emotions: To qualify for this specifier, an individual must have dis-
played at least two of the following characteristics persistently over at least 12 months and
in multiple relationships and settings. These characteristics reflect the individual’s typical
pattern of interpersonal and emotional functioning over this period and not just occasional
occurrences in some situations. Thus, to assess the criteria for the specifier, multiple infor-
mation sources are necessary. In addition to the individual’s self-report, it is necessary to
consider reports by others who have known the individual for extended periods of time
(e.g., parents, teachers, co-workers, extended family members, peers).
Lack of remorse or guilt: Does not feel bad or guilty when he or she does some-
thing wrong (exclude remorse when expressed only when caught and/or facing
punishment). The individual shows a general lack of concern about the negative
consequences of his or her actions. For example, the individual is not remorseful
after hurting someone or does not care about the consequences of breaking rules.
Callous—lack of empathy: Disregards and is unconcerned about the feelings of
others. The individual is described as cold and uncaring. The person appears more
concerned about the effects of his or her actions on himself or herself, rather than
their effects on others, even when they result in substantial harm to others.
Conduct Disorder 471
Unconcerned about performance: Does not show concern about poor/problem-
atic performance at school, at work, or in other important activities. The individual
does not put forth the effort necessary to perform well, even when expectations are
clear, and typically blames others for his or her poor performance.
Shallow or deficient affect: Does not express feelings or show emotions to others,
except in ways that seem shallow, insincere, or superficial (e.g., actions contradict the
emotion displayed; can turn emotions “on” or “off” quickly) or when emotional expres-
sions are used for gain (e.g., emotions displayed to manipulate or intimidate others).
Specify current severity:
Mild: Few if any conduct problems in excess of those required to make the diagnosis
are present, and conduct problems cause relatively minor harm to others (e.g., lying,
truancy, staying out after dark without permission, other rule breaking).
Moderate: The number of conduct problems and the effect on others are intermediate
between those specified in “mild” and those in “severe” (e.g., stealing without confront-
ing a victim, vandalism).
Severe: Many conduct problems in excess of those required to make the diagnosis are
present, or conduct problems cause considerable harm to others (e.g., forced sex, physical
cruelty, use of a weapon, stealing while confronting a victim, breaking and entering).
Subtypes
Three subtypes of conduct disorder are provided based on the age at onset of the disorder.
Onset is most accurately estimated with information from both the youth and the care-
giver; estimates are often 2 years later than actual onset. Both subtypes can occur in a mild,
moderate, or severe form. An unspecified-onset subtype is designated when there is in-
sufficient information to determine age at onset.
In childhood-onset conduct disorder, individuals are usually male, frequently display
physical aggression toward others, have disturbed peer relationships, may have had op-
positional defiant disorder during early childhood, and usually have symptoms that meet
full criteria for conduct disorder prior to puberty. Many children with this subtype also
have concurrent attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or other neurodevel-
opmental difficulties. Individuals with childhood-onset type are more likely to have per-
sistent conduct disorder into adulthood than are those with adolescent-onset type. As
compared with individuals with childhood-onset type, individuals with adolescent-onset
conduct disorder are less likely to display aggressive behaviors and tend to have more
normative peer relationships (although they often display conduct problems in the com-
pany of others). These individuals are less likely to have conduct disorder that persists into
adulthood. The ratio of males to females with conduct disorder is more balanced for the
adolescent-onset type than for the childhood-onset type.
Specifiers
A minority of individuals with conduct disorder exhibit characteristics that qualify for the
“with limited prosocial emotions” specifier. The indicators of this specifier are those that
have often been labeled as callous and unemotional traits in research. Other personality
features, such as thrill seeking, fearlessness, and insensitivity to punishment, may also dis-
tinguish those with characteristics described in the specifier. Individuals with character-
istics described in this specifier may be more likely than other individuals with conduct
disorder to engage in aggression that is planned for instrumental gain. Individuals with
conduct disorder of any subtype or any level of severity can have characteristics that qual-
ify for the specifier “with limited prosocial emotions,” although individuals with the spec-
ifier are more likely to have childhood-onset type and a severity specifier rating of severe.
472 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Although the validity of self-report to assess the presence of the specifier has been sup-
ported in some research contexts, individuals with conduct disorder with this specifier
may not readily admit to the traits in a clinical interview. Thus, to assess the criteria for the
specifier, multiple information sources are necessary. Also, because the indicators of the
specifier are characteristics that reflect the individual’s typical pattern of interpersonal and
emotional functioning, it is important to consider reports by others who have known the
individual for extended periods of time and across relationships and settings (e.g., par-
ents, teachers, co-workers, extended family members, peers).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of conduct disorder is a repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior
in which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are vi-
olated (Criterion A). These behaviors fall into four main groupings: aggressive conduct
that causes or threatens physical harm to other people or animals (Criteria A1–A7); non-
aggressive conduct that causes property loss or damage (Criteria A8–A9); deceitfulness or
theft (Criteria A10–A12); and serious violations of rules (Criteria A13–A15). Three or more
characteristic behaviors must have been present during the past 12 months, with at least
one behavior present in the past 6 months. The disturbance in behavior causes clinically
significant impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning (Criterion B). The
behavior pattern is usually present in a variety of settings, such as home, at school, or in
the community. Because individuals with conduct disorder are likely to minimize their
conduct problems, the clinician often must rely on additional informants. However, infor-
mants’ knowledge of the individual’s conduct problems may be limited if they have inad-
equately supervised the individual or the individual has concealed symptom behaviors.
Individuals with conduct disorder often initiate aggressive behavior and react aggres-
sively to others. They may display bullying, threatening, or intimidating behavior (includ-
ing bullying via messaging on Web-based social media) (Criterion A1); initiate frequent
physical fights (Criterion A2); use a weapon that can cause serious physical harm (e.g., a bat,
brick, broken bottle, knife, gun) (Criterion A3); be physically cruel to people (Criterion A4)
or animals (Criterion A5); steal while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse snatching,
extortion, armed robbery) (Criterion A6); or force someone into sexual activity (Criterion A7).
Physical violence may take the form of rape, assault, or, in rare cases, homicide. Deliberate
destruction of others’ property may include deliberate fire setting with the intention of caus-
ing serious damage (Criterion A8) or deliberate destroying of other people’s property in
other ways (e.g., smashing car windows, vandalizing school property) (Criterion A9). Acts of
deceitfulness or theft may include breaking into someone else’s house, building, or car (Crite-
rion A10); frequently lying or breaking promises to obtain goods or favors or to avoid debts
or obligations (e.g., “conning” other individuals) (Criterion A11); or stealing items of non-
trivial value without confronting the victim (e.g., shoplifting, forgery, fraud) (Criterion A12).
Individuals with conduct disorder may also frequently commit serious violations of
rules (e.g., school, parental, workplace). Children with conduct disorder often have a pat-
tern, beginning before age 13 years, of staying out late at night despite parental prohi-
bitions (Criterion A13). Children may also show a pattern of running away from home
overnight (Criterion A14). To be considered a symptom of conduct disorder, the running
away must have occurred at least twice (or only once if the individual did not return for a
lengthy period). Runaway episodes that occur as a direct consequence of physical or sex-
ual abuse do not typically qualify for this criterion. Children with conduct disorder may
often be truant from school, beginning prior to age 13 years (Criterion A15).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Especially in ambiguous situations, aggressive individuals with conduct disorder fre-
quently misperceive the intentions of others as more hostile and threatening than is the
Conduct Disorder 473
case and respond with aggression that they then feel is reasonable and justified. Person-
ality features of trait negative emotionality and poor self-control, including poor frustra-
tion tolerance, irritability, temper outbursts, suspiciousness, insensitivity to punishment,
thrill seeking, and recklessness, frequently co-occur with conduct disorder. Substance
misuse is often an associated feature, particularly in adolescent females. Suicidal ideation,
suicide attempts, and completed suicide occur at a higher-than-expected rate in individu-
als with conduct disorder.
Prevalence
One-year population prevalence estimates range from 2% to more than 10%, with a median
of 4%. The prevalence of conduct disorder appears to be fairly consistent across various
countries that differ in race and ethnicity. Prevalence rates rise from childhood to adoles-
cence and are higher among males than among females. Few children with impairing con-
duct disorder receive treatment.
Development and Course
The onset of conduct disorder may occur as early as the preschool years, but the first sig-
nificant symptoms usually emerge during the period from middle childhood through
middle adolescence. Oppositional defiant disorder is a common precursor to the child-
hood-onset type of conduct disorder. Conduct disorder may be diagnosed in adults, how-
ever, symptoms of conduct disorder usually emerge in childhood or adolescence, and
onset is rare after age 16 years. The course of conduct disorder after onset is variable. In a
majority of individuals, the disorder remits by adulthood. Many individuals with conduct
disorder—particularly those with adolescent-onset type and those with few and milder
symptoms—achieve adequate social and occupational adjustment as adults. However, the
early-onset type predicts a worse prognosis and an increased risk of criminal behavior,
conduct disorder, and substance-related disorders in adulthood. Individuals with conduct
disorder are at risk for later mood disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress dis-
order, impulse-control disorders, psychotic disorders, somatic symptom disorders, and
substance-related disorders as adults.
Symptoms of the disorder vary with age as the individual develops increased physical
strength, cognitive abilities, and sexual maturity. Symptom behaviors that emerge first
tend to be less serious (e.g., lying, shoplifting), whereas conduct problems that emerge last
tend to be more severe (e.g., rape, theft while confronting a victim). However, there are
wide differences among individuals, with some engaging in the more damaging behaviors
at an early age (which is predictive of a worse prognosis). When individuals with conduct
disorder reach adulthood, symptoms of aggression, property destruction, deceitfulness,
and rule violation, including violence against co-workers, partners, and children, may be ex-
hibited in the workplace and the home, such that antisocial personality disorder may be
considered.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Temperamental risk factors include a difficult undercontrolled infant
temperament and lower-than-average intelligence, particularly with regard to verbal IQ.
Environmental. Family-level risk factors include parental rejection and neglect, inconsis-
tent child-rearing practices, harsh discipline, physical or sexual abuse, lack of supervision,
early institutional living, frequent changes of caregivers, large family size, parental criminal-
ity, and certain kinds of familial psychopathology (e.g., substance-related disorders). Com-
munity-level risk factors include peer rejection, association with a delinquent peer group,
and neighborhood exposure to violence. Both types of risk factors tend to be more common
and severe among individuals with the childhood-onset subtype of conduct disorder.
474 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Genetic and physiological. Conduct disorder is influenced by both genetic and envi-
ronmental factors. The risk is increased in children with a biological or adoptive parent or
a sibling with conduct disorder. The disorder also appears to be more common in children
of biological parents with severe alcohol use disorder, depressive and bipolar disorders, or
schizophrenia or biological parents who have a history of ADHD or conduct disorder.
Family history particularly characterizes individuals with the childhood-onset subtype of
conduct disorder. Slower resting heart rate has been reliably noted in individuals with
conduct disorder compared with those without the disorder, and this marker is not char-
acteristic of any other mental disorder. Reduced autonomic fear conditioning, particularly
low skin conductance, is also well documented. However, these psychophysiological find-
ings are not diagnostic of the disorder. Structural and functional differences in brain areas
associated with affect regulation and affect processing, particularly frontotemporal-limbic
connections involving the brain’s ventral prefrontal cortex and amygdala, have been con-
sistently noted in individuals with conduct disorder compared with those without the dis-
order. However, neuroimaging findings are not diagnostic of the disorder.
Course modifiers. Persistence is more likely for individuals with behaviors that meet
criteria for the childhood-onset subtype and qualify for the specifier “with limited pro-
social emotions”. The risk that conduct disorder will persist is also increased by co-occurring
ADHD and by substance abuse.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Conduct disorder diagnosis may at times be potentially misapplied to individuals in set-
tings where patterns of disruptive behavior are viewed as near-normative (e.g., in very
threatening, high-crime areas or war zones). Therefore, the context in which the undesir-
able behaviors have occurred should be considered.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males with a diagnosis of conduct disorder frequently exhibit fighting, stealing, vandalism,
and school discipline problems. Females with a diagnosis of conduct disorder are more likely
to exhibit lying, truancy, running away, substance use, and prostitution. Whereas males tend
to exhibit both physical aggression and relational aggression (behavior that harms social re-
lationships of others), females tend to exhibit relatively more relational aggression.
Functional Consequences of Conduct Disorder
Conduct disorder behaviors may lead to school suspension or expulsion, problems in
work adjustment, legal difficulties, sexually transmitted diseases, unplanned pregnancy,
and physical injury from accidents or fights. These problems may preclude attendance in
ordinary schools or living in a parental or foster home. Conduct disorder is often associ-
ated with an early onset of sexual behavior, alcohol use, tobacco smoking, use of illegal
substances, and reckless and risk-taking acts. Accident rates appear to be higher among in-
dividuals with conduct disorder compared with those without the disorder. These func-
tional consequences of conduct disorder may predict health difficulties when individuals
reach midlife. It is not uncommon for individuals with conduct disorder to come into con-
tact with the criminal justice system for engaging in illegal behavior. Conduct disorder is
a common reason for treatment referral and is frequently diagnosed in mental health fa-
cilities for children, especially in forensic practice. It is associated with impairment that is
more severe and chronic than that experienced by other clinic-referred children.
Differential Diagnosis
Oppositional defiant disorder. Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder are
both related to symptoms that bring the individual in conflict with adults and other au-
Conduct Disorder 475
thority figures (e.g., parents, teachers, work supervisors). The behaviors of oppositional
defiant disorder are typically of a less severe nature than those of individuals with conduct
disorder and do not include aggression toward individuals or animals, destruction of
property, or a pattern of theft or deceit. Furthermore, oppositional defiant disorder in-
cludes problems of emotional dysregulation (i.e., angry and irritable mood) that are not in-
cluded in the definition of conduct disorder. When criteria are met for both oppositional
defiant disorder and conduct disorder, both diagnoses can be given.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Although children with ADHD often exhibit
hyperactive and impulsive behavior that may be disruptive, this behavior does not by it-
self violate societal norms or the rights of others and therefore does not usually meet cri-
teria for conduct disorder. When criteria are met for both ADHD and conduct disorder, both
diagnoses should be given.
Depressive and bipolar disorders. Irritability, aggression, and conduct problems can
occur in children or adolescents with a major depressive disorder, a bipolar disorder, or
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. The behaviorial problems associated with these
mood disorders can usually be distinguished from the pattern of conduct problems seen in
conduct disorder based on their course. Specifically, persons with conduct disorder will
display substantial levels of aggressive or non-aggressive conduct problems during peri-
ods in which there is no mood disturbance, either historically (i.e., a history of conduct
problems predating the onset of the mood disturbance) or concurrently (i.e., display of
some conduct problems that are premeditated and do not occur during periods of intense
emotional arousal). In those cases in which criteria for conduct disorder and a mood dis-
order are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Intermittent explosive disorder. Both conduct disorder and intermittent explosive dis-
order involve high rates of aggression. However, the aggression in individuals with inter-
mittent explosive disorder is limited to impulsive aggression and is not premeditated, and
it is not committed in order to achieve some tangible objective (e.g., money, power, intim-
idation). Also, the definition of intermittent explosive disorder does not include the non-
aggressive symptoms of conduct disorder. If criteria for both disorders are met, the diag-
nosis of intermittent explosive disorder should be given only when the recurrent impul-
sive aggressive outbursts warrant independent clinical attention.
Adjustment disorders. The diagnosis of an adjustment disorder (with disturbance of con-
duct or with mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct) should be considered if clinically
significant conduct problems that do not meet the criteria for another specific disorder de-
velop in clear association with the onset of a psychosocial stressor and do not resolve within
6 months of the termination of the stressor (or its consequences). Conduct disorder is diag-
nosed only when the conduct problems represent a repetitive and persistent pattern that is
associated with impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning.
Comorbidity
ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder are both common in individuals with conduct
disorder, and this comorbid presentation predicts worse outcomes. Individuals who show
the personality features associated with antisocial personality disorder often violate the
basic rights of others or violate major age-appropriate societal norms, and as a result their
pattern of behavior often meets criteria for conduct disorder. Conduct disorder may also
co-occur with one or more of the following mental disorders: specific learning disorder,
anxiety disorders, depressive or bipolar disorders, and substance-related disorders. Aca-
demic achievement, particularly in reading and other verbal skills, is often below the level
expected on the basis of age and intelligence and may justify the additional diagnosis of
specific learning disorder or a communication disorder.
476 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Criteria and text for antisocial personality disorder can be found in the chapter “Person-
ality Disorders.” Because this disorder is closely connected to the spectrum of “external-
izing” conduct disorders in this chapter, as well as to the disorders in the adjoining chapter
“Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders,” it is dual coded here as well as in the chap-
ter “Personality Disorders.”
Pyromania
Diagnostic Criteria 312.33 (F63.1)
A. B. Deliberate and purposeful fire setting on more than one occasion.
Tension or affective arousal before the act.
C. Fascination with, interest in, curiosity about, or attraction to fire and its situational con-
texts (e.g., paraphernalia, uses, consequences).
D. Pleasure, gratification, or relief when setting fires or when witnessing or participating
in their aftermath.
E. The fire setting is not done for monetary gain, as an expression of sociopolitical ideol-
ogy, to conceal criminal activity, to express anger or vengeance, to improve one’s living
circumstances, in response to a delusion or hallucination, or as a result of impaired
judgment (e.g., in major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual disability [intellectual de-
velopmental disorder], substance intoxication).
F. The fire setting is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or anti-
social personality disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of pyromania is the presence of multiple episodes of deliberate and
purposeful fire setting (Criterion A). Individuals with this disorder experience tension or af-
fective arousal before setting a fire (Criterion B). There is a fascination with, interest in, cu-
riosity about, or attraction to fire and its situational contexts (e.g., paraphernalia, uses,
consequences) (Criterion C). Individuals with this disorder are often regular “watchers” at
fires in their neighborhoods, may set off false alarms, and derive pleasure from institutions,
equipment, and personnel associated with fire. They may spend time at the local fire depart-
ment, set fires to be affiliated with the fire department, or even become firefighters. Individ-
uals with this disorder experience pleasure, gratification, or relief when setting the fire,
witnessing its effects, or participating in its aftermath (Criterion D). The fire setting is not
done for monetary gain, as an expression of sociopolitical ideology, to conceal criminal ac-
tivity, to express anger or vengeance, to improve one’s living circumstances, or in response
to a delusion or a hallucination (Criterion E). The fire setting does not result from impaired
judgment (e.g., in major neurocognitive disorder or intellectual disability [intellectual devel-
opmental disorder]). The diagnosis is not made if the fire setting is better explained by con-
duct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial personality disorder (Criterion F).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with pyromania may make considerable advance preparation for starting a
fire. They may be indifferent to the consequences to life or property caused by the fire, or
Pyromania 477
they may derive satisfaction from the resulting property destruction. The behaviors may
lead to property damage, legal consequences, or injury or loss of life to the fire setter or to
others. Individuals who impulsively set fires (who may or may not have pyromania) often
have a current or past history of alcohol use disorder.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of pyromania is not known. The lifetime prevalence of fire set-
ting, which is just one component of pyromania and not sufficient for a diagnosis by itself,
was reported as 1.13% in a population sample, but the most common comorbidities were
antisocial personality disorder, substance use disorder, bipolar disorder, and pathological
gambling (gambling disorder). In contrast, pyromania as a primary diagnosis appears to
be very rare. Among a sample of persons reaching the criminal system with repeated fire
setting, only 3.3% had symptoms that met full criteria for pyromania.
Development and Course
There are insufficient data to establish a typical age at onset of pyromania. The relation-
ship between fire setting in childhood and pyromania in adulthood has not been docu-
mented. In individuals with pyromania, fire-setting incidents are episodic and may wax
and wane in frequency. Longitudinal course is unknown. Although fire setting is a major
problem in children and adolescents (over 40% of those arrested for arson offenses in the
United States are younger than 18 years), pyromania in childhood appears to be rare. Ju-
venile fire setting is usually associated with conduct disorder, attention-deficit/hyperac-
tivity disorder, or an adjustment disorder.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Pyromania occurs much more often in males, especially those with poorer social skills and
learning difficulties.
Differential Diagnosis
Other causes of intentional fire setting. It is important to rule out other causes of fire
setting before giving the diagnosis of pyromania. Intentional fire setting may occur for
profit, sabotage, or revenge; to conceal a crime; to make a political statement (e.g., an act of
terrorism or protest); or to attract attention or recognition (e.g., setting a fire in order to dis-
cover it and save the day). Fire setting may also occur as part of developmental experi-
mentation in childhood (e.g., playing with matches, lighters, or fire).
Other mental disorders. A separate diagnosis of pyromania is not given when fire set-
ting occurs as part of conduct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial personality disorder,
or if it occurs in response to a delusion or a hallucination (e.g., in schizophrenia) or is at-
tributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition (e.g., epilepsy). The di-
agnosis of pyromania should also not be given when fire setting results from impaired
judgment associated with major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual disability, or sub-
stance intoxication.
Comorbidity
There appears to be a high co-occurrence of substance use disorders, gambling disorder,
depressive and bipolar disorders, and other disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct dis-
orders with pyromania.
478 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Kleptomania
Diagnostic Criteria 312.32 (F63.2)
A. Recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal objects that are not needed for personal
use or for their monetary value.
B. Increasing sense of tension immediately before committing the theft.
C. Pleasure, gratification, or relief at the time of committing the theft.
D. The stealing is not committed to express anger or vengeance and is not in response
to a delusion or a hallucination.
E. The stealing is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial
personality disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of kleptomania is the recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal items
even though the items are not needed for personal use or for their monetary value (Criterion
A). The individual experiences a rising subjective sense of tension before the theft (Criterion B)
and feels pleasure, gratification, or relief when committing the theft (Criterion C). The stealing
is not committed to express anger or vengeance, is not done in response to a delusion or hal-
lucination (Criterion D), and is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or
antisocial personality disorder (Criterion E). The objects are stolen despite the fact that they are
typically of little value to the individual, who could have afforded to pay for them and often
gives them away or discards them. Occasionally the individual may hoard the stolen objects or
surreptitiously return them. Although individuals with this disorder will generally avoid
stealing when immediate arrest is probable (e.g., in full view of a police officer), they usually
do not preplan the thefts or fully take into account the chances of apprehension. The stealing is
done without assistance from, or collaboration with, others.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with kleptomania typically attempt to resist the impulse to steal, and they are
aware that the act is wrong and senseless. The individual frequently fears being appre-
hended and often feels depressed or guilty about the thefts. Neurotransmitter pathways
associated with behavioral addictions, including those associated with the serotonin, do-
pamine, and opioid systems, appear to play a role in kleptomania as well.
Prevalence
Kleptomania occurs in about 4%–24% of individuals arrested for shoplifting. Its preva-
lence in the general population is very rare, at approximately 0.3%–0.6%. Females outnum-
ber males at a ratio of 3:1.
Development and Course
Age at onset of kleptomania is variable, but the disorder often begins in adolescence. How-
ever, the disorder may begin in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, and in rare cases
in late adulthood. There is little systematic information on the course of kleptomania, but
three typical courses have been described: sporadic with brief episodes and long periods
of remission; episodic with protracted periods of stealing and periods of remission; and
chronic with some degree of fluctuation. The disorder may continue for years, despite
multiple convictions for shoplifting.
Other Specified Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorder 479
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. There are no controlled family history studies of kleptoma-
nia. However, first-degree relatives of individuals with kleptomania may have higher
rates of obsessive-compulsive disorder than the general population. There also appears to
be a higher rate of substance use disorders, including alcohol use disorder, in relatives of
individuals with kleptomania than in the general population.
Functional Consequences of Kleptomania
The disorder may cause legal, family, career, and personal difficulties.
Differential Diagnosis
Ordinary theft. Kleptomania should be distinguished from ordinary acts of theft or
shoplifting. Ordinary theft (whether planned or impulsive) is deliberate and is motivated
by the usefulness of the object or its monetary worth. Some individuals, especially adoles-
cents, may also steal on a dare, as an act of rebellion, or as a rite of passage. The diagnosis
is not made unless other characteristic features of kleptomania are also present. Klepto-
mania is exceedingly rare, whereas shoplifting is relatively common.
Malingering. In malingering, individuals may simulate the symptoms of kleptomania to
avoid criminal prosecution.
Antisocial personality disorder and conduct disorder. Antisocial personality disorder
and conduct disorder are distinguished from kleptomania by a general pattern of antiso-
cial behavior.
Manic episodes, psychotic episodes, and major neurocognitive disorder. Kleptomania
should be distinguished from intentional or inadvertent stealing that may occur during a
manic episode, in response to delusions or hallucinations (as in, e.g., schizophrenia), or as
a result of a major neurocognitive disorder.
Comorbidity
Kleptomania may be associated with compulsive buying as well as with depressive and
bipolar disorders (especially major depressive disorder), anxiety disorders, eating disor-
ders (particularly bulimia nervosa), personality disorders, substance use disorders (espe-
cially alcohol use disorder), and other disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders.
Other Specified Disruptive, Impulse-Control,
and Conduct Disorder
312.89 (F91.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a disruptive,
impulse-control, and conduct disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the disruptive, impulse-control, and con-
duct disorders diagnostic class. The other specified disruptive, impulse-control, and con-
duct disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate
the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific disrup-
tive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder. This is done by recording “other specified dis-
ruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g.,
“recurrent behavioral outbursts of insufficient frequency”).
480 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Unspecified Disruptive, Impulse-Control,
and Conduct Disorder
312.9 (F91.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a disruptive,
impulse-control, and conduct disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the disruptive, impulse-control, and con-
duct disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the rea-
son that the criteria are not met for a specific disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct dis-
order, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more
specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Substance-Related and
Addictive Disorders
The substance-related disorders encompass 10 separate classes of drugs: alco-
hol; caffeine; cannabis; hallucinogens (with separate categories for phencyclidine [or sim-
ilarly acting arylcyclohexylamines] and other hallucinogens); inhalants; opioids;
sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (amphetamine-type substances, cocaine,
and other stimulants); tobacco; and other (or unknown) substances. These 10 classes are
not fully distinct. All drugs that are taken in excess have in common direct activation of
the brain reward system, which is involved in the reinforcement of behaviors and the pro-
duction of memories. They produce such an intense activation of the reward system that
normal activities may be neglected. Instead of achieving reward system activation
through adaptive behaviors, drugs of abuse directly activate the reward pathways. The
pharmacological mechanisms by which each class of drugs produces reward are different,
but the drugs typically activate the system and produce feelings of pleasure, often re-
ferred to as a “high.” Furthermore, individuals with lower levels of self-control, which
may reflect impairments of brain inhibitory mechanisms, may be particularly predisposed
to develop substance use disorders, suggesting that the roots of substance use disorders
for some persons can be seen in behaviors long before the onset of actual substance use
itself.
In addition to the substance-related disorders, this chapter also includes gambling dis-
order, reflecting evidence that gambling behaviors activate reward systems similar to
those activated by drugs of abuse and produce some behavioral symptoms that appear
comparable to those produced by the substance use disorders. Other excessive behavioral
patterns, such as Internet gaming, have also been described, but the research on these and
other behavioral syndromes is less clear. Thus, groups of repetitive behaviors, which some
term behavioral addictions, with such subcategories as “sex addiction,” “exercise addiction,”
or “shopping addiction,” are not included because at this time there is insufficient peer-re-
viewed evidence to establish the diagnostic criteria and course descriptions needed to
identify these behaviors as mental disorders.
The substance-related disorders are divided into two groups: substance use disorders
and substance-induced disorders. The following conditions may be classified as sub-
stance-induced: intoxication, withdrawal, and other substance/medication-induced men-
tal disorders (psychotic disorders, bipolar and related disorders, depressive disorders,
anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, sleep disorders, sexual dys-
functions, delirium, and neurocognitive disorders).
The current section begins with a general discussion of criteria sets for a substance
use disorder, substance intoxication and withdrawal, and other substance/medication-
induced mental disorders, at least some of which are applicable across classes of sub-
stances. Reflecting some unique aspects of the 10 substance classes relevant to this chapter,
the remainder of the chapter is organized by the class of substance and describes their
unique aspects. To facilitate differential diagnosis, the text and criteria for the remaining
substance/medication-induced mental disorders are included with disorders with which
they share phenomenology (e.g., substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is in
the chapter “Depressive Disorders”). The broad diagnostic categories associated with each
specific group of substances are shown in Table 1.
481
TABLE 1 Diagnoses associated with substance class
Psychotic
disorders
Bipolar
disorders
Depres-
sive
disorders
Anxiety
disorders
Obsessive-
compulsive
and related
disorders
Sleep
disorders
Sexual
dysfunc-
tions Delirium
Neuro-
cognitive
disorders
Substance
use
disorders
Sub-
stance
intoxi-
cation
Sub-
stance
with-
drawal
Alcohol I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W/P X X X
Caffeine I I/W X X
Cannabis I I I/W I X X X
Hallucinogens
Phencyclidine I I I I I X X
Other hallucino-
I* I I I I X X
gens
Inhalants I I I I I/P X X
Opioids I/W W I/W I/W I/W X X X
Sedatives,
I/W I/W I/W W I/W I/W I/W I/W/P X X X
hypnotics, or
anxiolytics
Stimulants** I I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I I X X X
Tobacco W X X
Other (or
unknown)
I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W/P X X X
Note. X = The category is recognized in DSM-5.
I = The specifier “with onset during intoxication” may be noted for the category.
W = The specifier “with onset during withdrawal” may be noted for the category.
I/W = Either “with onset during intoxication” or “with onset during withdrawal” may be noted for the category.
P = The disorder is persisting.
*Also hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (flashbacks).
**Includes amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, and other or unspecified stimulants.
482 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Substance Use Disorders 483
Substance-Related Disorders
Substance Use Disorders
Features
The essential feature of a substance use disorder is a cluster of cognitive, behavioral, and
physiological symptoms indicating that the individual continues using the substance de-
spite significant substance-related problems. As seen in Table 1, the diagnosis of a sub-
stance use disorder can be applied to all 10 classes included in this chapter except caffeine.
For certain classes some symptoms are less salient, and in a few instances not all symptoms
apply (e.g., withdrawal symptoms are not specified for phencyclidine use disorder, other
hallucinogen use disorder, or inhalant use disorder).
An important characteristic of substance use disorders is an underlying change in brain cir-
cuits that may persist beyond detoxification, particularly in individuals with severe disorders.
The behavioral effects of these brain changes may be exhibited in the repeated relapses and in-
tense drug craving when the individuals are exposed to drug-related stimuli. These persistent
drug effects may benefit from long-term approaches to treatment.
Overall, the diagnosis of a substance use disorder is based on a pathological pattern of
behaviors related to use of the substance. To assist with organization, Criterion A criteria can
be considered to fit within overall groupings of impaired control, social impairment, risky use,
and pharmacological criteria. Impaired control over substance use is the first criteria grouping
(Criteria 1–4). The individual may take the substance in larger amounts or over a longer pe-
riod than was originally intended (Criterion 1). The individual may express a persistent de-
sire to cut down or regulate substance use and may report multiple unsuccessful efforts to
decrease or discontinue use (Criterion 2). The individual may spend a great deal of time ob-
taining the substance, using the substance, or recovering from its effects (Criterion 3). In
some instances of more severe substance use disorders, virtually all of the individual’s daily
activities revolve around the substance. Craving (Criterion 4) is manifested by an intense de-
sire or urge for the drug that may occur at any time but is more likely when in an environ-
ment where the drug previously was obtained or used. Craving has also been shown to
involve classical conditioning and is associated with activation of specific reward structures
in the brain. Craving is queried by asking if there has ever been a time when they had such
strong urges to take the drug that they could not think of anything else. Current craving is of-
ten used as a treatment outcome measure because it may be a signal of impending relapse.
Social impairment is the second grouping of criteria (Criteria 5–7). Recurrent substance
use may result in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work, school, or home (Crite-
rion 5). The individual may continue substance use despite having persistent or recurrent
social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the substance (Cri-
terion 6). Important social, occupational, or recreational activities may be given up or re-
duced because of substance use (Criterion 7). The individual may withdraw from family
activities and hobbies in order to use the substance.
Risky use of the substance is the third grouping of criteria (Criteria 8–9). This may take
the form of recurrent substance use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (Cri-
terion 8). The individual may continue substance use despite knowledge of having a per-
sistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or
exacerbated by the substance (Criterion 9). The key issue in evaluating this criterion is not
the existence of the problem, but rather the individual’s failure to abstain from using the
substance despite the difficulty it is causing.
484 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Pharmacological criteria are the final grouping (Criteria 10 and 11). Tolerance (Crite-
rion 10) is signaled by requiring a markedly increased dose of the substance to achieve the
desired effect or a markedly reduced effect when the usual dose is consumed. The degree
to which tolerance develops varies greatly across different individuals as well as across
substances and may involve a variety of central nervous system effects. For example, tol-
erance to respiratory depression and tolerance to sedating and motor coordination may
develop at different rates, depending on the substance. Tolerance may be difficult to de-
termine by history alone, and laboratory tests may be helpful (e.g., high blood levels of the
substance coupled with little evidence of intoxication suggest that tolerance is likely). Tol-
erance must also be distinguished from individual variability in the initial sensitivity to
the effects of particular substances. For example, some first-time alcohol drinkers show
very little evidence of intoxication with three or four drinks, whereas others of similar
weight and drinking histories have slurred speech and incoordination.
Withdrawal (Criterion 11) is a syndrome that occurs when blood or tissue concentra-
tions of a substance decline in an individual who had maintained prolonged heavy use of
the substance. After developing withdrawal symptoms, the individual is likely to con-
sume the substance to relieve the symptoms. Withdrawal symptoms vary greatly across
the classes of substances, and separate criteria sets for withdrawal are provided for the
drug classes. Marked and generally easily measured physiological signs of withdrawal are
common with alcohol, opioids, and sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics. Withdrawal
signs and symptoms with stimulants (amphetamines and cocaine), as well as tobacco and
cannabis, are often present but may be less apparent. Significant withdrawal has not been
documented in humans after repeated use of phencyclidine, other hallucinogens, and in-
halants; therefore, this criterion is not included for these substances. Neither tolerance nor
withdrawal is necessary for a diagnosis of a substance use disorder. However, for most
classes of substances, a past history of withdrawal is associated with a more severe clinical
course (i.e., an earlier onset of a substance use disorder, higher levels of substance intake,
and a greater number of substance-related problems).
Symptoms of tolerance and withdrawal occurring during appropriate medical treat-
ment with prescribed medications (e.g., opioid analgesics, sedatives, stimulants) are spe-
cifically not counted when diagnosing a substance use disorder. The appearance of normal,
expected pharmacological tolerance and withdrawal during the course of medical treat-
ment has been known to lead to an erroneous diagnosis of “addiction” even when these
were the only symptoms present. Individuals whose only symptoms are those that occur
as a result of medical treatment (i.e., tolerance and withdrawal as part of medical care
when the medications are taken as prescribed) should not receive a diagnosis solely on the
basis of these symptoms. However, prescription medications can be used inappropriately,
and a substance use disorder can be correctly diagnosed when there are other symptoms
of compulsive, drug-seeking behavior.
Severity and Specifiers
Substance use disorders occur in a broad range of severity, from mild to severe, with se-
verity based on the number of symptom criteria endorsed. As a general estimate of sever-
ity, a mild substance use disorder is suggested by the presence of two to three symptoms,
moderate by four to five symptoms, and severe by six or more symptoms. Changing severity
across time is also reflected by reductions or increases in the frequency and/or dose of
substance use, as assessed by the individual’s own report, report of knowledgeable others,
clinician’s observations, and biological testing. The following course specifiers and descrip-
tive features specifiers are also available for substance use disorders: “in early remission,”
“in sustained remission,” “on maintenance therapy,” and “in a controlled environment.”
Definitions of each are provided within respective criteria sets.
Substance Use Disorders 485
Recording Procedures for Substance Use Disorders
The clinician should use the code that applies to the class of substances but record the
name of the specific substance. For example, the clinician should record 304.10 (F13.20)
moderate alprazolam use disorder (rather than moderate sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
use disorder) or 305.70 (F15.10) mild methamphetamine use disorder (rather than mild
stimulant use disorder). For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., anabolic
steroids), the appropriate code for “other substance use disorder” should be used and the
specific substance indicated (e.g., 305.90 [F19.10] mild anabolic steroid use disorder). If the
substance taken by the individual is unknown, the code for the class “other (or unknown)”
should be used (e.g., 304.90 [F19.20] severe unknown substance use disorder). If criteria
are met for more than one substance use disorder, all should be diagnosed (e.g., 304.00
[F11.20] severe heroin use disorder; 304.20 [F14.20] moderate cocaine use disorder).
The appropriate ICD-10-CM code for a substance use disorder depends on whether
there is a comorbid substance-induced disorder (including intoxication and withdrawal). In
the above example, the diagnostic code for moderate alprazolam use disorder, F13.20, re-
flects the absence of a comorbid alprazolam-induced mental disorder. Because ICD-10-CM
codes for substance-induced disorders indicate both the presence (or absence) and severity
of the substance use disorder, ICD-10-CM codes for substance use disorders can be used
only in the absence of a substance-induced disorder. See the individual substance-specific
sections for additional coding information.
Note that the word addiction is not applied as a diagnostic term in this classification,
although it is in common usage in many countries to describe severe problems related to
compulsive and habitual use of substances. The more neutral term substance use disorder is
used to describe the wide range of the disorder, from a mild form to a severe state of chron-
ically relapsing, compulsive drug taking. Some clinicians will choose to use the word ad-
diction to describe more extreme presentations, but the word is omitted from the official
DSM-5 substance use disorder diagnostic terminology because of its uncertain definition
and its potentially negative connotation.
Substance-Induced Disorders
The overall category of substance-induced disorders includes intoxication, withdrawal,
and other substance/medication-induced mental disorders (e.g., substance-induced psy-
chotic disorder, substance-induced depressive disorder).
Substance Intoxication and Withdrawal
Criteria for substance intoxication are included within the substance-specific sections of
this chapter. The essential feature is the development of a reversible substance-specific
syndrome due to the recent ingestion of a substance (Criterion A). The clinically significant
problematic behavioral or psychological changes associated with intoxication (e.g., bellig-
erence, mood lability, impaired judgment) are attributable to the physiological effects of
the substance on the central nervous system and develop during or shortly after use of the
substance (Criterion B). The symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition
and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D). Substance intoxi-
cation is common among those with a substance use disorder but also occurs frequently in
individuals without a substance use disorder. This category does not apply to tobacco.
The most common changes in intoxication involve disturbances of perception, wake-
fulness, attention, thinking, judgment, psychomotor behavior, and interpersonal behav-
ior. Short-term, or “acute,” intoxications may have different signs and symptoms than
486 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
sustained, or “chronic,” intoxications. For example, moderate cocaine doses may initially
produce gregariousness, but social withdrawal may develop if such doses are frequently
repeated over days or weeks.
When used in the physiological sense, the term intoxication is broader than substance
intoxication as defined here. Many substances may produce physiological or psychologi-
cal changes that are not necessarily problematic. For example, an individual with tachy-
cardia from substance use has a physiological effect, but if this is the only symptom in the
absence of problematic behavior, the diagnosis of intoxication would not apply. Intoxica-
tion may sometimes persist beyond the time when the substance is detectable in the body.
This may be due to enduring central nervous system effects, the recovery of which takes
longer than the time for elimination of the substance. These longer-term effects of intoxi-
cation must be distinguished from withdrawal (i.e., symptoms initiated by a decline in
blood or tissue concentrations of a substance).
Criteria for substance withdrawal are included within the substance-specific sections of
this chapter. The essential feature is the development of a substance-specific problematic be-
havioral change, with physiological and cognitive concomitants, that is due to the cessation of,
or reduction in, heavy and prolonged substance use (Criterion A). The substance-specific syn-
drome causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other im-
portant areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms are not due to another medical
condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion D). Withdrawal
is usually, but not always, associated with a substance use disorder. Most individuals with
withdrawal have an urge to re-administer the substance to reduce the symptoms.
Route of Administration and Speed of Substance Effects
Routes of administration that produce more rapid and efficient absorption into the blood-
stream (e.g., intravenous, smoking, intranasal “snorting”) tend to result in a more intense
intoxication and an increased likelihood of an escalating pattern of substance use leading
to withdrawal. Similarly, rapidly acting substances are more likely than slower-acting
substances to produce immediate intoxication.
Duration of Effects
Within the same drug category, relatively short-acting substances tend to have a higher
potential for the development of withdrawal than do those with a longer duration of ac-
tion. However, longer-acting substances tend to have longer withdrawal duration. The
half-life of the substance parallels aspects of withdrawal: the longer the duration of action,
the longer the time between cessation and the onset of withdrawal symptoms and the lon-
ger the withdrawal duration. In general, the longer the acute withdrawal period, the less
intense the syndrome tends to be.
Use of Multiple Substances
Substance intoxication and withdrawal often involve several substances used simultane-
ously or sequentially. In these cases, each diagnosis should be recorded separately.
Associated Laboratory Findings
Laboratory analyses of blood and urine samples can help determine recent use and the specific
substances involved. However, a positive laboratory test result does not by itself indicate that
the individual has a pattern of substance use that meets criteria for a substance-induced or sub-
stance use disorder, and a negative test result does not by itself rule out a diagnosis.
Laboratory tests can be useful in identifying withdrawal. If the individual presents
with withdrawal from an unknown substance, laboratory tests may help identify the sub-
stance and may also be helpful in differentiating withdrawal from other mental disorders.
Substance-Induced Disorders 487
In addition, normal functioning in the presence of high blood levels of a substance sug-
gests considerable tolerance.
Development and Course
Individuals ages 18–24 years have relatively high prevalence rates for the use of virtually
every substance. Intoxication is usually the initial substance-related disorder and often be-
gins in the teens. Withdrawal can occur at any age as long as the relevant drug has been
taken in sufficient doses over an extended period of time.
Recording Procedures for Intoxication and Withdrawal
The clinician should use the code that applies to the class of substances but record the
name of the specific substance. For example, the clinician should record 292.0 (F13.239) seco-
barbital withdrawal (rather than sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal) or 292.89
(F15.129) methamphetamine intoxication (rather than stimulant intoxication). Note that
the appropriate ICD-10-CM diagnostic code for intoxication depends on whether there is
a comorbid substance use disorder. In this case, the F15.129 code for methamphetamine in-
dicates the presence of a comorbid mild methamphetamine use disorder. If there had been
no comorbid methamphetamine use disorder, the diagnostic code would have been
F15.929. ICD-10-CM coding rules require that all withdrawal codes imply a comorbid
moderate to severe substance use disorder for that substance. In the above case, the code
for secobarbital withdrawal (F13.239) indicates the comorbid presence of a moderate to se-
vere secobarbital use disorder. See the coding note for the substance-specific intoxication
and withdrawal syndromes for the actual coding options.
For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., anabolic steroids), the appropriate
code for “other substance intoxication” should be used and the specific substance indicated
(e.g., 292.89 [F19.929] anabolic steroid intoxication). If the substance taken by the individual is
unknown, the code for the class “other (or unknown)” should be used (e.g., 292.89 [F19.929]
unknown substance intoxication). If there are symptoms or problems associated with a partic-
ular substance but criteria are not met for any of the substance-specific disorders, the unspec-
ified category can be used (e.g., 292.9 [F12.99] unspecified cannabis-related disorder).
As noted above, the substance-related codes in ICD-10-CM combine the substance use dis-
order aspect of the clinical picture and the substance-induced aspect into a single combined
code. Thus, if both heroin withdrawal and moderate heroin use disorder are present, the single
code F11.23 is given to cover both presentations. In ICD-9-CM, separate diagnostic codes
(292.0 and 304.00) are given to indicate withdrawal and a moderate heroin use disorder, re-
spectively. See the individual substance-specific sections for additional coding information.
Substance/Medication-Induced Mental Disorders
The substance/medication-induced mental disorders are potentially severe, usually tem-
porary, but sometimes persisting central nervous system (CNS) syndromes that develop
in the context of the effects of substances of abuse, medications, or several toxins. They are
distinguished from the substance use disorders, in which a cluster of cognitive, behav-
ioral, and physiological symptoms contribute to the continued use of a substance despite
significant substance-related problems. The substance/medication-induced mental disor-
ders may be induced by the 10 classes of substances that produce substance use disorders,
or by a great variety of other medications used in medical treatment. Each substance-
induced mental disorder is described in the relevant chapter (e.g., “Depressive Disorders,”
“Neurocognitive Disorders”), and therefore, only a brief description is offered here. All
substance/medication-induced disorders share common characteristics. It is important to
recognize these common features to aid in the detection of these disorders. These features
are described as follows:
488 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
A. The disorder represents a clinically significant symptomatic presentation of a relevant
mental disorder.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of
both of the following:
1. The disorder developed during or within 1 month of a substance intoxication or
withdrawal or taking a medication; and
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the mental disorder.
C. The disorder is not better explained by an independent mental disorder (i.e., one that is
not substance- or medication-induced). Such evidence of an independent mental dis-
order could include the following:
1. The disorder preceded the onset of severe intoxication or withdrawal or exposure
to the medication; or
2. The full mental disorder persisted for a substantial period of time (e.g., at least 1 month)
after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication or taking the medica-
tion. This criterion does not apply to substance-induced neurocognitive disorders
or hallucinogen persisting perception disorder, which persist beyond the cessation
of acute intoxication or withdrawal.
D. The disorder does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disorder causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Features
Some generalizations can be made regarding the categories of substances capable of produc-
ing clinically relevant substance-induced mental disorders. In general, the more sedating
drugs (sedative, hypnotics, or anxiolytics, and alcohol) can produce prominent and clini-
cally significant depressive disorders during intoxication, while anxiety conditions are likely
to be observed during withdrawal syndromes from these substances. Also, during intoxica-
tion, the more stimulating substances (e.g., amphetamines and cocaine) are likely to be as-
sociated with substance-induced psychotic disorders and substance-induced anxiety
disorders, with substance-induced major depressive episodes observed during withdrawal.
Both the more sedating and more stimulating drugs are likely to produce significant but
temporary sleep and sexual disturbances. An overview of the relationship between specific
categories of substances and specific psychiatric syndromes is presented in Table 1.
The medication-induced conditions include what are often idiosyncratic CNS reac-
tions or relatively extreme examples of side effects for a wide range of medications taken
for a variety of medical concerns. These include neurocognitive complications of anesthet-
ics, antihistamines, antihypertensives, and a variety of other medications and toxins (e.g.,
organophosphates, insecticides, carbon monoxide), as described in the chapter on neuro-
cognitive disorders. Psychotic syndromes may be temporarily experienced in the context
of anticholinergic, cardiovascular, and steroid drugs, as well as during use of stimulant-
like and depressant-like prescription or over-the-counter drugs. Temporary but severe
mood disturbances can be observed with a wide range of medications, including steroids,
antihypertensives, disulfiram, and any prescription or over-the-counter depressant or
stimulant-like substances. A similar range of medications can be associated with tempo-
rary anxiety syndromes, sexual dysfunctions, and conditions of disturbed sleep.
In general, to be considered a substance/medication-induced mental disorder, there
must be evidence that the disorder being observed is not likely to be better explained by an
independent mental condition. The latter are most likely to be seen if the mental disorder
was present before the severe intoxication or withdrawal or medication administration, or,
with the exception of several substance-induced persisting disorders listed in Table 1, con-
tinued more than 1 month after cessation of acute withdrawal, severe intoxication, or use
Substance-Induced Disorders 489
of the medications. When symptoms are only observed during a delirium (e.g., alcohol
withdrawal delirium), the mental disorder should be diagnosed as a delirium, and the
psychiatric syndrome occurring during the delirium should not also be diagnosed sepa-
rately, as many symptoms (including disturbances in mood, anxiety, and reality testing)
are commonly seen during agitated, confused states. The features associated with each rel-
evant major mental disorder are similar whether observed with independent or sub-
stance/medication-induced mental disorders. However, individuals with substance/
medication-induced mental disorders are likely to also demonstrate the associated fea-
tures seen with the specific category of substance or medication, as listed in other subsec-
tions of this chapter.
Development and Course
Substance-induced mental disorders develop in the context of intoxication or withdrawal
from substances of abuse, and medication-induced mental disorders are seen with pre-
scribed or over-the-counter medications that are taken at the suggested doses. Both condi-
tions are usually temporary and likely to disappear within 1 month or so of cessation of acute
withdrawal, severe intoxication, or use of the medication. Exceptions to these generaliza-
tions occur for certain long-duration substance-induced disorders: substance-associated
neurocognitive disorders that relate to conditions such as alcohol-induced neurocognitive
disorder, inhalant-induced neurocognitive disorder, and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-
induced neurocognitive disorder; and hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (“flash-
backs”; see the section “Hallucinogen-Related Disorders” later in this chapter). However,
most other substance/medication-induced mental disorders, regardless of the severity of
the symptoms, are likely to improve relatively quickly with abstinence and unlikely to re-
main clinically relevant for more than 1 month after complete cessation of use.
As is true of many consequences of heavy substance use, some individuals are more
and others less prone toward specific substance-induced disorders. Similar types of pre-
dispositions may make some individuals more likely to develop psychiatric side effects of
some types of medications, but not others. However, it is unclear whether individuals
with family histories or personal prior histories with independent psychiatric syndromes
are more likely to develop the induced syndrome once the consideration is made as to
whether the quantity and frequency of the substance was sufficient to lead to the devel-
opment of a substance-induced syndrome.
There are indications that the intake of substances of abuse or some medications with
psychiatric side effects in the context of a preexisting mental disorder is likely to result in
an intensification of the preexisting independent syndrome. The risk for substance/med-
ication-induced mental disorders is likely to increase with both the quantity and the fre-
quency of consumption of the relevant substance.
The symptom profiles for the substance/medication-induced mental disorders resem-
ble independent mental disorders. While the symptoms of substance/medication-in-
duced mental disorders can be identical to those of independent mental disorders (e.g.,
delusions, hallucinations, psychoses, major depressive episodes, anxiety syndromes), and
although they can have the same severe consequences (e.g., suicide), most induced mental
disorders are likely to improve in a matter of days to weeks of abstinence.
The substance/medication-induced mental disorders are an important part of the dif-
ferential diagnoses for the independent psychiatric conditions. The importance of recog-
nizing an induced mental disorder is similar to the relevance of identifying the possible
role of some medical conditions and medication reactions before diagnosing an indepen-
dent mental disorder. Symptoms of substance- and medication-induced mental disorders
may be identical cross-sectionally to those of independent mental disorders but have dif-
ferent treatments and prognoses from the independent condition.
490 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-
Induced Mental Disorders
The same consequences related to the relevant independent mental disorder (e.g., suicide
attempts) are likely to apply to the substance/medication-induced mental disorders, but
these are likely to disappear within 1 month after abstinence. Similarly, the same func-
tional consequences associated with the relevant substance use disorder are likely to be seen
for the substance-induced mental disorders.
Recording Procedures for Substance/Medication-
Induced Mental Disorders
Coding notes and separate recording procedures for ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for
other specific substance/medication-induced mental disorders are provided in other
chapters of the manual with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the sub-
stance/medication-induced mental disorders in these chapters: “Schizophrenia Spectrum
and Other Psychotic Disorders,” “Bipolar and Related Disorders,” “Depressive Disor-
ders,” “Anxiety Disorders,” “Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders,” “Sleep-
Wake Disorders,” “Sexual Dysfunctions,” and “Neurocognitive Disorders”). Generally,
for ICD-9-CM, if a mental disorder is induced by a substance use disorder, a separate di-
agnostic code is given for the specific substance use disorder, in addition to the code for the
substance/medication-induced mental disorder. For ICD-10-CM, a single code combines
the substance-induced mental disorder with the substance use disorder. A separate diag-
nosis of the comorbid substance use disorder is not given, although the name and severity
of the specific substance use disorder (when present) are used when recording the sub-
stance/medication-induced mental disorder. ICD-10-CM codes are also provided for sit-
uations in which the substance/medication-induced mental disorder is not induced by a
substance use disorder (e.g., when a disorder is induced by one-time use of a substance or
medication). Additional information needed to record the diagnostic name of the sub-
stance/medication-induced mental disorder is provided in the section “Recording Proce-
dures” for each substance/medication-induced mental disorder in its respective chapter.
Alcohol-Related Disorders
Alcohol Use Disorder
Alcohol Intoxication
Alcohol Withdrawal
Other Alcohol-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Alcohol-Related Disorder
Alcohol Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically significant impairment or dis-
tress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. 2. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended.
There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control alcohol use.
Alcohol Use Disorder 491
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain alcohol, use alcohol,
or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol.
5. Recurrent alcohol use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work,
school, or home.
6. Continued alcohol use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal
problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of alcohol.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of alcohol use.
8. Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated
by alcohol.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxication or de-
sired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of alcohol.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for alcohol (refer to Criteria A and B of
the criteria set for alcohol withdrawal, pp. 499–500).
b. Alcohol (or a closely related substance, such as a benzodiazepine) is taken to
relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for alcohol use disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for alcohol use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but for
less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire
or urge to use alcohol,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for alcohol use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for alcohol use disorder have been met at any time during a
period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
strong desire or urge to use alcohol,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to alcohol is restricted.
Code based on current severity: Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If an alcohol intoxication,
alcohol withdrawal, or another alcohol-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use
the codes below for alcohol use disorder. Instead, the comorbid alcohol use disorder is
indicated in the 4th character of the alcohol-induced disorder code (see the coding note
for alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, or a specific alcohol-induced mental disorder).
For example, if there is comorbid alcohol intoxication and alcohol use disorder, only the
alcohol intoxication code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid
alcohol use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F10.129 for mild alcohol use disorder
with alcohol intoxication or F10.229 for a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder with al-
cohol intoxication.
Specify current severity:
305.00 (F10.10) Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
303.90 (F10.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
303.90 (F10.20) Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
492 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these
environments are closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units.
Severity of the disorder is based on the number of diagnostic criteria endorsed. For a
given individual, changes in severity of alcohol use disorder across time are also reflected
by reductions in the frequency (e.g., days of use per month) and/or dose (e.g., number of
standard drinks consumed per day) of alcohol used, as assessed by the individual’s self-
report, report of knowledgeable others, clinician observations, and, when practical, bio-
logical testing (e.g., elevations in blood tests as described in the section “Diagnostic Mark-
ers” for this disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Alcohol use disorder is defined by a cluster of behavioral and physical symptoms, which
can include withdrawal, tolerance, and craving. Alcohol withdrawal is characterized by
withdrawal symptoms that develop approximately 4–12 hours after the reduction of in-
take following prolonged, heavy alcohol ingestion. Because withdrawal from alcohol can
be unpleasant and intense, individuals may continue to consume alcohol despite adverse
consequences, often to avoid or to relieve withdrawal symptoms. Some withdrawal symp-
toms (e.g., sleep problems) can persist at lower intensities for months and can contribute to
relapse. Once a pattern of repetitive and intense use develops, individuals with alcohol
use disorder may devote substantial periods of time to obtaining and consuming alcoholic
beverages.
Craving for alcohol is indicated by a strong desire to drink that makes it difficult to
think of anything else and that often results in the onset of drinking. School and job per-
formance may also suffer either from the aftereffects of drinking or from actual intoxica-
tion at school or on the job; child care or household responsibilities may be neglected; and
alcohol-related absences may occur from school or work. The individual may use alcohol
in physically hazardous circumstances (e.g., driving an automobile, swimming, operating
machinery while intoxicated). Finally, individuals with an alcohol use disorder may con-
tinue to consume alcohol despite the knowledge that continued consumption poses sig-
nificant physical (e.g., blackouts, liver disease), psychological (e.g., depression), social, or
interpersonal problems (e.g., violent arguments with spouse while intoxicated, child
abuse).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Alcohol use disorder is often associated with problems similar to those associated with
other substances (e.g., cannabis; cocaine; heroin; amphetamines; sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics). Alcohol may be used to alleviate the unwanted effects of these other
substances or to substitute for them when they are not available. Symptoms of conduct
problems, depression, anxiety, and insomnia frequently accompany heavy drinking and
sometimes precede it.
Repeated intake of high doses of alcohol can affect nearly every organ system, espe-
cially the gastrointestinal tract, cardiovascular system, and the central and peripheral ner-
vous systems. Gastrointestinal effects include gastritis, stomach or duodenal ulcers, and,
in about 15% of individuals who use alcohol heavily, liver cirrhosis and/or pancreatitis.
There is also an increased rate of cancer of the esophagus, stomach, and other parts of the
gastrointestinal tract. One of the most commonly associated conditions is low-grade hy-
pertension. Cardiomyopathy and other myopathies are less common but occur at an in-
Alcohol Use Disorder 493
creased rate among those who drink very heavily. These factors, along with marked
increases in levels of triglycerides and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, contribute to
an elevated risk of heart disease. Peripheral neuropathy may be evidenced by muscular
weakness, paresthesias, and decreased peripheral sensation. More persistent central ner-
vous system effects include cognitive deficits, severe memory impairment, and degener-
ative changes in the cerebellum. These effects are related to the direct effects of alcohol or
of trauma and to vitamin deficiencies (particularly of the B vitamins, including thiamine).
One devastating central nervous system effect is the relatively rare alcohol-induced per-
sisting amnestic disorder, or Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, in which the ability to encode
new memory is severely impaired. This condition would now be described within the chap-
ter “Neurocognitive Disorders” and would be termed a substance/medication-induced neuro-
cognitive disorder.
Alcohol use disorder is an important contributor to suicide risk during severe intoxi-
cation and in the context of a temporary alcohol-induced depressive and bipolar disorder.
There is an increased rate of suicidal behavior as well as of completed suicide among in-
dividuals with the disorder.
Prevalence
Alcohol use disorder is a common disorder. In the United States, the 12-month prevalence
of alcohol use disorder is estimated to be 4.6% among 12- to 17-year-olds and 8.5% among
adults age 18 years and older in the United States. Rates of the disorder are greater among
adult men (12.4%) than among adult women (4.9%). Twelve-month prevalence of alcohol
use disorder among adults decreases in middle age, being greatest among individuals 18-
to 29-years-old (16.2%) and lowest among individuals age 65 years and older (1.5%).
Twelve-month prevalence varies markedly across race/ethnic subgroups of the U.S.
population. For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are greatest among Hispanics (6.0%) and Native
Americans and Alaska Natives (5.7%) relative to whites (5.0%), African Americans (1.8%),
and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (1.6%). In contrast, among adults, the 12-month
prevalence of alcohol use disorder is clearly greater among Native Americans and Alaska
Natives (12.1%) than among whites (8.9%), Hispanics (7.9%), African Americans (6.9%),
and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (4.5%).
Development and Course
The first episode of alcohol intoxication is likely to occur during the mid-teens. Alcohol-
related problems that do not meet full criteria for a use disorder or isolated problems may
occur prior to age 20 years, but the age at onset of an alcohol use disorder with two or more
of the criteria clustered together peaks in the late teens or early to mid 20s. The large ma-
jority of individuals who develop alcohol-related disorders do so by their late 30s. The first
evidence of withdrawal is not likely to appear until after many other aspects of an alcohol
use disorder have developed. An earlier onset of alcohol use disorder is observed in ado-
lescents with preexisting conduct problems and those with an earlier onset of intoxication.
Alcohol use disorder has a variable course that is characterized by periods of remission
and relapse. A decision to stop drinking, often in response to a crisis, is likely to be followed
by a period of weeks or more of abstinence, which is often followed by limited periods of
controlled or nonproblematic drinking. However, once alcohol intake resumes, it is highly
likely that consumption will rapidly escalate and that severe problems will once again
develop.
Alcohol use disorder is often erroneously perceived as an intractable condition, per-
haps based on the fact that individuals who present for treatment typically have a history
of many years of severe alcohol-related problems. However, these most severe cases rep-
resent only a small proportion of individuals with this disorder, and the typical individual
with the disorder has a much more promising prognosis.
494 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Among adolescents, conduct disorder and repeated antisocial behavior often co-occur
with alcohol- and with other substance-related disorders. While most individuals with al-
cohol use disorder develop the condition before age 40 years, perhaps 10% have later
onset. Age-related physical changes in older individuals result in increased brain suscep-
tibility to the depressant effects of alcohol; decreased rates of liver metabolism of a variety
of substances, including alcohol; and decreased percentages of body water. These changes
can cause older people to develop more severe intoxication and subsequent problems at
lower levels of consumption. Alcohol-related problems in older people are also especially
likely to be associated with other medical complications.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Environmental risk and prognostic factors may include cultural atti-
tudes toward drinking and intoxication, the availability of alcohol (including price),
acquired personal experiences with alcohol, and stress levels. Additional potential medi-
ators of how alcohol problems develop in predisposed individuals include heavier peer
substance use, exaggerated positive expectations of the effects of alcohol, and suboptimal
ways of coping with stress.
Genetic and physiological. Alcohol use disorder runs in families, with 40%–60% of the
variance of risk explained by genetic influences. The rate of this condition is three to four
times higher in close relatives of individuals with alcohol use disorder, with values highest
for individuals with a greater number of affected relatives, closer genetic relationships to
the affected person, and higher severity of the alcohol-related problems in those relatives.
A significantly higher rate of alcohol use disorders exists in the monozygotic twin than in
the dizygotic twin of an individual with the condition. A three- to fourfold increase in risk
has been observed in children of individuals with alcohol use disorder, even when these
children were given up for adoption at birth and raised by adoptive parents who did not
have the disorder.
Recent advances in our understanding of genes that operate through intermediate
characteristics (or phenotypes) to affect the risk of alcohol use disorder can help to identify
individuals who might be at particularly low or high risk for alcohol use disorder. Among
the low-risk phenotypes are the acute alcohol-related skin flush (seen most prominently in
Asians). High vulnerability is associated with preexisting schizophrenia or bipolar disor-
der, as well as impulsivity (producing enhanced rates of all substance use disorders and
gambling disorder), and a high risk specifically for alcohol use disorder is associated with
a low level of response (low sensitivity) to alcohol. A number of gene variations may ac-
count for low response to alcohol or modulate the dopamine reward systems; it is impor-
tant to note, however, that any one gene variation is likely to explain only 1%–2% of the risk
for these disorders.
Course modifiers. In general, high levels of impulsivity are associated with an earlier
onset and more severe alcohol use disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In most cultures, alcohol is the most frequently used intoxicating substance and contrib-
utes to considerable morbidity and mortality. An estimated 3.8% of all global deaths and
4.6% of global disability-adjusted life-years are attributable to alcohol. In the United States,
80% of adults (age 18 years and older) have consumed alcohol at some time in their lives,
and 65% are current drinkers (last 12 months). An estimated 3.6% of the world population
(15–64 years old) has a current (12-month) alcohol use disorder, with a lower prevalence
(1.1%) found in the African region, a higher rate (5.2%) found in the American region (North,
South, and Central America and the Caribbean), and the highest rate (10.9%) found in the
Eastern Europe region.
Alcohol Use Disorder 495
Polymorphisms of genes for the alcohol-metabolizing enzymes alcohol dehydroge-
nase and aldehyde dehydrogenase are most often seen in Asians and affect the response to
alcohol. When consuming alcohol, individuals with these gene variations can experience a
flushed face and palpitations, reactions that can be so severe as to limit or preclude future
alcohol consumption and diminish the risk for alcohol use disorder. These gene variations
are seen in as many as 40% of Japanese, Chinese, Korean, and related groups worldwide
and are related to lower risks for the disorder.
Despite small variations regarding individual criterion items, the diagnostic criteria
perform equally well across most race/ethnicity groups.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males have higher rates of drinking and related disorders than females. However, because
females generally weigh less than males, have more fat and less water in their bodies, and
metabolize less alcohol in their esophagus and stomach, they are likely to develop higher
blood alcohol levels per drink than males. Females who drink heavily may also be more
vulnerable than males to some of the physical consequences associated with alcohol, in-
cluding liver disease.
Diagnostic Markers
Individuals whose heavier drinking places them at elevated risk for alcohol use disorder
can be identified both through standardized questionnaires and by elevations in blood test
results likely to be seen with regular heavier drinking. These measures do not establish a
diagnosis of an alcohol-related disorder but can be useful in highlighting individuals for
whom more information should be gathered. The most direct test available to measure al-
cohol consumption cross-sectionally is blood alcohol concentration, which can also be used to
judge tolerance to alcohol. For example, an individual with a concentration of 150 mg of
ethanol per deciliter (dL) of blood who does not show signs of intoxication can be pre-
sumed to have acquired at least some degree of tolerance to alcohol. At 200 mg/dL, most
nontolerant individuals demonstrate severe intoxication.
Regarding laboratory tests, one sensitive laboratory indicator of heavy drinking is a
modest elevation or high-normal levels (>35 units) of gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT).
This may be the only laboratory finding. At least 70% of individuals with a high GGT level
are persistent heavy drinkers (i.e., consuming eight or more drinks daily on a regular basis).
A second test with comparable or even higher levels of sensitivity and specificity is carbo-
hydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT), with levels of 20 units or higher useful in identifying in-
dividuals who regularly consume eight or more drinks daily. Since both GGT and CDT
levels return toward normal within days to weeks of stopping drinking, both state markers
may be useful in monitoring abstinence, especially when the clinician observes increases,
rather than decreases, in these values over time—a finding indicating that the person is
likely to have returned to heavy drinking. The combination of tests for CDT and GGT may
have even higher levels of sensitivity and specificity than either test used alone. Additional
useful tests include the mean corpuscular volume (MCV), which may be elevated to high-
normal values in individuals who drink heavily—a change that is due to the direct toxic ef-
fects of alcohol on erythropoiesis. Although the MCV can be used to help identify those who
drink heavily, it is a poor method of monitoring abstinence because of the long half-life of
red blood cells. Liver function tests (e.g., alanine aminotransferase [ALT] and alkaline phos-
phatase) can reveal liver injury that is a consequence of heavy drinking. Other potential
markers of heavy drinking that are more nonspecific for alcohol but can help the clinician
think of the possible effects of alcohol include elevations in blood levels or lipids (e.g., tri-
glycerides and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol) and high-normal levels of uric acid.
Additional diagnostic markers relate to signs and symptoms that reflect the consequences
often associated with persistent heavy drinking. For example, dyspepsia, nausea, and bloat-
496 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
ing can accompany gastritis, and hepatomegaly, esophageal varices, and hemorrhoids may
reflect alcohol-induced changes in the liver. Other physical signs of heavy drinking include
tremor, unsteady gait, insomnia, and erectile dysfunction. Males with chronic alcohol use dis-
order may exhibit decreased testicular size and feminizing effects associated with reduced
testosterone levels. Repeated heavy drinking in females is associated with menstrual irregu-
larities and, during pregnancy, spontaneous abortion and fetal alcohol syndrome. Individu-
als with preexisting histories of epilepsy or severe head trauma are more likely to develop
alcohol-related seizures. Alcohol withdrawal may be associated with nausea, vomiting, gas-
tritis, hematemesis, dry mouth, puffy blotchy complexion, and mild peripheral edema.
Functional Consequences of Alcohol Use Disorder
The diagnostic features of alcohol use disorder highlight major areas of life functioning
likely to be impaired. These include driving and operating machinery, school and work,
interpersonal relationships and communication, and health. Alcohol-related disorders
contribute to absenteeism from work, job-related accidents, and low employee productiv-
ity. Rates are elevated in homeless individuals, perhaps reflecting a downward spiral in
social and occupational functioning, although most individuals with alcohol use disorder
continue to live with their families and function within their jobs.
Alcohol use disorder is associated with a significant increase in the risk of accidents, vi-
olence, and suicide. It is estimated that one in five intensive care unit admissions in some
urban hospitals is related to alcohol and that 40% of individuals in the United States ex-
perience an alcohol-related adverse event at some time in their lives, with alcohol account-
ing for up to 55% of fatal driving events. Severe alcohol use disorder, especially in
individuals with antisocial personality disorder, is associated with the commission of
criminal acts, including homicide. Severe problematic alcohol use also contributes to dis-
inhibition and feelings of sadness and irritability, which contribute to suicide attempts and
completed suicides.
Unanticipated alcohol withdrawal in hospitalized individuals for whom a diagnosis of
alcohol use disorder has been overlooked can add to the risks and costs of hospitalization
and to time spent in the hospital.
Differential Diagnosis
Nonpathological use of alcohol. The key element of alcohol use disorder is the use of
heavy doses of alcohol with resulting repeated and significant distress or impaired func-
tioning. While most drinkers sometimes consume enough alcohol to feel intoxicated, only
a minority (less than 20%) ever develop alcohol use disorder. Therefore, drinking, even
daily, in low doses and occasional intoxication do not by themselves make this diagnosis.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. The signs and symptoms of alcohol use
disorder are similar to those seen in sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. The two
must be distinguished, however, because the course may be different, especially in rela-
tion to medical problems.
Conduct disorder in childhood and adult antisocial personality disorder. Alcohol use
disorder, along with other substance use disorders, is seen in the majority of individuals
with antisocial personality and preexisting conduct disorder. Because these diagnoses are
associated with an early onset of alcohol use disorder as well as a worse prognosis, it is im-
portant to establish both conditions.
Comorbidity
Bipolar disorders, schizophrenia, and antisocial personality disorder are associated with a
markedly increased rate of alcohol use disorder, and several anxiety and depressive disorders
Alcohol Intoxication 497
may relate to alcohol use disorder as well. At least a part of the reported association between
depression and moderate to severe alcohol use disorder may be attributable to temporary, al-
cohol-induced comorbid depressive symptoms resulting from the acute effects of intoxication
or withdrawal. Severe, repeated alcohol intoxication may also suppress immune mechanisms
and predispose individuals to infections and increase the risk for cancers.
Alcohol Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent ingestion of alcohol.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropri-
ate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment) that developed
during, or shortly after, alcohol ingestion.
C. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly after,
alcohol use:
1. Slurred speech.
2. Incoordination.
3. Unsteady gait.
4. Nystagmus.
5. Impairment in attention or memory.
6. Stupor or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better
explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 303.00. The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid alcohol use disorder. If a mild alcohol use disorder is comorbid, the
ICD-10-CM code is F10.129, and if a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder is comorbid,
the ICD-10-CM code is F10.229. If there is no comorbid alcohol use disorder, then the
ICD-10-CM code is F10.929.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of alcohol intoxication is the presence of clinically significant problematic
behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood
lability, impaired judgment, impaired social or occupational functioning) that develop during,
or shortly after, alcohol ingestion (Criterion B). These changes are accompanied by evidence of
impaired functioning and judgment and, if intoxication is intense, can result in a life-threaten-
ing coma. The symptoms must not be attributable to another medical condition (e.g., diabetic
ketoacidosis), are not a reflection of conditions such as delirium, and are not related to intoxi-
cation with other depressant drugs (e.g., benzodiazepines) (Criterion D). The levels of incoor-
dination can interfere with driving abilities and performance of usual activities to the point of
causing accidents. Evidence of alcohol use can be obtained by smelling alcohol on the individ-
ual’s breath, eliciting a history from the individual or another observer, and, when needed,
having the individual provide breath, blood, or urine samples for toxicology analyses.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Alcohol intoxication is sometimes associated with amnesia for the events that occurred
during the course of the intoxication (“blackouts”). This phenomenon may be related to
the presence of a high blood alcohol level and, perhaps, to the rapidity with which this
level is reached. During even mild alcohol intoxication, different symptoms are likely to be
498 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
observed at different time points. Evidence of mild intoxication with alcohol can be seen in
most individuals after approximately two drinks (each standard drink is approximately
10–12 grams of ethanol and raises the blood alcohol concentration approximately 20 mg/
dL). Early in the drinking period, when blood alcohol levels are rising, symptoms often
include talkativeness, a sensation of well-being, and a bright, expansive mood. Later, es-
pecially when blood alcohol levels are falling, the individual is likely to become progres-
sively more depressed, withdrawn, and cognitively impaired. At very high blood alcohol
levels (e.g., 200–300 mg/dL), an individual who has not developed tolerance for alcohol is
likely to fall asleep and enter a first stage of anesthesia. Higher blood alcohol levels (e.g., in
excess of 300–400 mg/dL) can cause inhibition of respiration and pulse and even death in
nontolerant individuals. The duration of intoxication depends on how much alcohol was
consumed over what period of time. In general, the body is able to metabolize approxi-
mately one drink per hour, so that the blood alcohol level generally decreases at a rate of
15–20 mg/dL per hour. Signs and symptoms of intoxication are likely to be more intense
when the blood alcohol level is rising than when it is falling.
Alcohol intoxication is an important contributor to suicidal behavior. There appears to
be an increased rate of suicidal behavior, as well as of completed suicide, among persons
intoxicated by alcohol.
Prevalence
The large majority of alcohol consumers are likely to have been intoxicated to some degree at
some point in their lives. For example, in 2010, 44% of 12th-grade students admitted to having
been “drunk in the past year,” with more than 70% of college students reporting the same.
Development and Course
Intoxication usually occurs as an episode usually developing over minutes to hours and typi-
cally lasting several hours. In the United States, the average age at first intoxication is approx-
imately 15 years, with the highest prevalence at approximately 18–25 years. Frequency and
intensity usually decrease with further advancing age. The earlier the onset of regular intoxi-
cation, the greater the likelihood the individual will go on to develop alcohol use disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Episodes of alcohol intoxication increase with personality characteris-
tics of sensation seeking and impulsivity.
Environmental. Episodes of alcohol intoxication increase with a heavy drinking envi-
ronment.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The major issues parallel the cultural differences regarding the use of alcohol overall.
Thus, college fraternities and sororities may encourage alcohol intoxication. This condi-
tion is also frequent on certain dates of cultural significance (e.g., New Year’s Eve) and, for
some subgroups, during specific events (e.g., wakes following funerals). Other subgroups
encourage drinking at religious celebrations (e.g., Jewish and Catholic holidays), while
still others strongly discourage all drinking or intoxication (e.g., some religious groups,
such as Mormons, fundamentalist Christians, and Muslims).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Historically, in many Western societies, acceptance of drinking and drunkenness is more
tolerated for males, but such gender differences may be much less prominent in recent
years, especially during adolescence and young adulthood.
Alcohol Withdrawal 499
Diagnostic Markers
Intoxication is usually established by observing an individual’s behavior and smelling alcohol
on the breath. The degree of intoxication increases with an individual’s blood or breath alcohol
level and with the ingestion of other substances, especially those with sedating effects.
Functional Consequences of Alcohol Intoxication
Alcohol intoxication contributes to the more than 30,000 alcohol-related drinking deaths in
the United States each year. In addition, intoxication with this drug contributes to huge
costs associated with drunk driving, lost time from school or work, as well as interpersonal
arguments and physical fights.
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions. Several medical (e.g., diabetic acidosis) and neurological condi-
tions (e.g., cerebellar ataxia, multiple sclerosis) can temporarily resemble alcohol intoxication.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication. Intoxication with sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic drugs or with other sedating substances (e.g., antihistamines, anticholinergic
drugs) can be mistaken for alcohol intoxication. The differential requires observing alco-
hol on the breath, measuring blood or breath alcohol levels, ordering a medical workup,
and gathering a good history. The signs and symptoms of sedative-hypnotic intoxication
are very similar to those observed with alcohol and include similar problematic behavioral
or psychological changes. These changes are accompanied by evidence of impaired func-
tioning and judgment—which, if intense, can result in a life-threatening coma—and levels
of incoordination that can interfere with driving abilities and with performing usual
activities. However, there is no smell as there is with alcohol, but there is likely to be evi-
dence of misuse of the depressant drug in the blood or urine toxicology analyses.
Comorbidity
Alcohol intoxication may occur comorbidly with other substance intoxication, especially
in individuals with conduct disorder or antisocial personality disorder.
Alcohol Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria
A. B. C. Cessation of (or reduction in) alcohol use that has been heavy and prolonged.
Two (or more) of the following, developing within several hours to a few days after the
cessation of (or reduction in) alcohol use described in Criterion A:
1. Autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., sweating or pulse rate greater than 100 bpm).
2. Increased hand tremor.
3. Insomnia.
4. Nausea or vomiting.
5. Transient visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions.
6. Psychomotor agitation.
7. Anxiety.
8. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
500 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from
another substance.
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances: This specifier applies in the rare instance when hal-
lucinations (usually visual or tactile) occur with intact reality testing, or auditory, visual,
or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 291.81. The ICD-10-CM code for alcohol withdrawal
without perceptual disturbances is F10.239, and the ICD-10-CM code for alcohol withdrawal
with perceptual disturbances is F10.232. Note that the ICD-10-CM code indicates the comor-
bid presence of a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder, reflecting the fact that alcohol with-
drawal can only occur in the presence of a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder. It is not
permissible to code a comorbid mild alcohol use disorder with alcohol withdrawal.
Specifiers
When hallucinations occur in the absence of delirium (i.e., in a clear sensorium), a diagno-
sis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of alcohol withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops within several hours to a few days after the cessation of (or re-
duction in) heavy and prolonged alcohol use (Criteria A and B). The withdrawal syn-
drome includes two or more of the symptoms reflecting autonomic hyperactivity and
anxiety listed in Criterion B, along with gastrointestinal symptoms.
Withdrawal symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, oc-
cupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not
be attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by another men-
tal disorder (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder), including intoxication or withdrawal
from another substance (e.g., sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal) (Criterion D).
Symptoms can be relieved by administering alcohol or benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam).
The withdrawal symptoms typically begin when blood concentrations of alcohol decline
sharply (i.e., within 4–12 hours) after alcohol use has been stopped or reduced. Reflecting the
relatively fast metabolism of alcohol, symptoms of alcohol withdrawal usually peak in inten-
sity during the second day of abstinence and are likely to improve markedly by the fourth or
fifth day. Following acute withdrawal, however, symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, and auto-
nomic dysfunction may persist for up to 3–6 months at lower levels of intensity.
Fewer than 10% of individuals who develop alcohol withdrawal will ever develop dra-
matic symptoms (e.g., severe autonomic hyperactivity, tremors, alcohol withdrawal delir-
ium). Tonic-clonic seizures occur in fewer than 3% of individuals.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Although confusion and changes in consciousness are not core criteria for alcohol with-
drawal, alcohol withdrawal delirium (see “Delirium” in the chapter “Neurocognitive Dis-
orders”) may occur in the context of withdrawal. As is true for any agitated, confused state,
regardless of the cause, in addition to a disturbance of consciousness and cognition, with-
drawal delirium can include visual, tactile, or (rarely) auditory hallucinations (delirium tre-
mens). When alcohol withdrawal delirium develops, it is likely that a clinically relevant
medical condition may be present (e.g., liver failure, pneumonia, gastrointestinal bleeding,
sequelae of head trauma, hypoglycemia, an electrolyte imbalance, postoperative status).
Alcohol Withdrawal 501
Prevalence
It is estimated that approximately 50% of middle-class, highly functional individuals with
alcohol use disorder have ever experienced a full alcohol withdrawal syndrome. Among
individuals with alcohol use disorder who are hospitalized or homeless, the rate of al-
cohol withdrawal may be greater than 80%. Less than 10% of individuals in withdrawal
ever demonstrate alcohol withdrawal delirium or withdrawal seizures.
Development and Course
Acute alcohol withdrawal occurs as an episode usually lasting 4–5 days and only after
extended periods of heavy drinking. Withdrawal is relatively rare in individuals younger
than 30 years, and the risk and severity increase with increasing age.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. The probability of developing alcohol withdrawal increases with the
quantity and frequency of alcohol consumption. Most individuals with this condition are
drinking daily, consuming large amounts (approximately more than eight drinks per day)
for multiple days. However, there are large inter-individual differences, with enhanced
risks for individuals with concurrent medical conditions, those with family histories of al-
cohol withdrawal (i.e., a genetic component), those with prior withdrawals, and individ-
uals who consume sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs.
Diagnostic Markers
Autonomic hyperactivity in the context of moderately high but falling blood alcohol levels
and a history of prolonged heavy drinking indicate a likelihood of alcohol withdrawal.
Functional Consequences of Alcohol Withdrawal
Symptoms of withdrawal may serve to perpetuate drinking behaviors and contribute to
relapse, resulting in persistently impaired social and occupational functioning. Symptoms
requiring medically supervised detoxification result in hospital utilization and loss of
work productivity. Overall, the presence of withdrawal is associated with greater func-
tional impairment and poor prognosis.
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions. The symptoms of alcohol withdrawal can also be mimicked
by some medical conditions (e.g., hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis). Essential
tremor, a disorder that frequently runs in families, may erroneously suggest the tremu-
lousness associated with alcohol withdrawal.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic with-
drawal produces a syndrome very similar to that of alcohol withdrawal.
Comorbidity
Withdrawal is more likely to occur with heavier alcohol intake, and that might be most of-
ten observed in individuals with conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder.
Withdrawal states are also more severe in older individuals, individuals who are also de-
pendent on other depressant drugs (sedative-hypnotics), and individuals who have had
more alcohol withdrawal experiences in the past.
502 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Other Alcohol-Induced Disorders
The following alcohol-induced disorders are described in other chapters of the manual with
disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-induced
mental disorders in these chapters): alcohol-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia Spec-
trum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); alcohol-induced bipolar disorder (“Bipolar and
Related Disorders”); alcohol-induced depressive disorder (“Depressive Disorders”); alcohol-
induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety Disorders”); alcohol-induced sleep disorder (“Sleep-
Wake Disorders”); alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction (“Sexual Dysfunctions”); and alcohol-
induced major or mild neurocognitive disorder (“Neurocognitive Disorders”). For alcohol
intoxication delirium and alcohol withdrawal delirium, see the criteria and discussion of de-
lirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders.” These alcohol-induced disorders are diag-
nosed instead of alcohol intoxication or alcohol withdrawal only when the symptoms are
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Features
The symptom profiles for an alcohol-induced condition resemble independent mental disor-
ders as described elsewhere in DSM-5. However, the alcohol-induced disorder is temporary
and observed after severe intoxication with and/or withdrawal from alcohol. While the symp-
toms can be identical to those of independent mental disorders (e.g., psychoses, major depres-
sive disorder), and while they can have the same severe consequences (e.g., suicide attempts),
alcohol-induced conditions are likely to improve without formal treatment in a matter of days
to weeks after cessation of severe intoxication and/or withdrawal.
Each alcohol-induced mental disorder is listed in the relevant diagnostic section and there-
fore only a brief description is offered here. Alcohol-induced disorders must have developed
in the context of severe intoxication and/or withdrawal from the substance capable of produc-
ing the mental disorder. In addition, there must be evidence that the disorder being observed
is not likely to be better explained by another non-alcohol-induced mental disorder. The latter
is likely to occur if the mental disorder was present before the severe intoxication or with-
drawal, or continued more than 1 month after the cessation of severe intoxication and/or with-
drawal. When symptoms are observed only during a delirium, they should be considered part
of the delirium and not diagnosed separately, as many symptoms (including disturbances in
mood, anxiety, and reality testing) are commonly seen during agitated, confused states. The al-
cohol-induced disorder must be clinically relevant, causing significant levels of distress or sig-
nificant functional impairment. Finally, there are indications that the intake of substances of
abuse in the context of a preexisting mental disorder are likely to result in an intensification of
the preexisting independent syndrome.
The features associated with each relevant major mental disorder (e.g., psychotic epi-
sodes, major depressive disorder) are similar whether observed with an independent or an
alcohol-induced condition. However, individuals with alcohol-induced disorders are
likely to also demonstrate the associated features seen with an alcohol use disorder, as
listed in the subsections of this chapter.
Rates of alcohol-induced disorders vary somewhat by diagnostic category. For exam-
ple, the lifetime risk for major depressive episodes in individuals with alcohol use disorder
is approximately 40%, but only about one-third to one-half of these represent independent
major depressive syndromes observed outside the context of intoxication. Similar rates of
alcohol-induced sleep and anxiety conditions are likely, but alcohol-induced psychotic ep-
isodes are fairly rare.
Development and Course
Once present, the symptoms of an alcohol-induced condition are likely to remain clinically
relevant as long as the individual continues to experience severe intoxication and/or with-
Unspecified Alcohol-Related Disorder 503
drawal. While the symptoms are identical to those of independent mental disorders (e.g.,
psychoses, major depressive disorder), and while they can have the same severe conse-
quences (e.g., suicide attempts), all alcohol-induced syndromes other than alcohol-
induced neurocognitive disorder, amnestic confabulatory type (alcohol-induced persist-
ing amnestic disorder), regardless of the severity of the symptoms, are likely to improve
relatively quickly and unlikely to remain clinically relevant for more than 1 month after
cessation of severe intoxication and/or withdrawal.
The alcohol-induced disorders are an important part of the differential diagnoses for
the independent mental conditions. Independent schizophrenia, major depressive disor-
der, bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders, such as panic disorder, are likely to be asso-
ciated with much longer-lasting periods of symptoms and often require longer-term
medications to optimize the probability of improvement or recovery. The alcohol-induced
conditions, on the other hand, are likely to be much shorter in duration and disappear
within several days to 1 month after cessation of severe intoxication and/or withdrawal,
even without psychotropic medications.
The importance of recognizing an alcohol-induced disorder is similar to the relevance
of identifying the possible role of some endocrine conditions and medication reactions be-
fore diagnosing an independent mental disorder. In light of the high prevalence of alcohol
use disorders worldwide, it is important that these alcohol-induced diagnoses be consid-
ered before independent mental disorders are diagnosed.
Unspecified Alcohol-Related Disorder
291.9 (F10.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an alcohol-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific alcohol-related disorder or any of the disorders in the substance-related
and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Caffeine-Related Disorders
Caffeine Intoxication
Caffeine Withdrawal
Other Caffeine-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Caffeine-Related Disorder
Caffeine Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria 305.90 (F15.929)
A. Recent consumption of caffeine (typically a high dose well in excess of 250 mg).
B. Five (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly after,
caffeine use:
1. Restlessness.
2. Nervousness.
504 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
C. D. 3. Excitement.
4. Insomnia.
5. Flushed face.
6. Diuresis.
7. Gastrointestinal disturbance.
8. Muscle twitching.
9. Rambling flow of thought and speech.
10. Tachycardia or cardiac arrhythmia.
11. Periods of inexhaustibility.
12. Psychomotor agitation.
The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not bet-
ter explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another substance.
Diagnostic Features
Caffeine can be consumed from a number of different sources, including coffee, tea, caf-
feinated soda, “energy” drinks, over-the-counter analgesics and cold remedies, energy
aids (e.g., drinks), weight-loss aids, and chocolate. Caffeine is also increasingly being used
as an additive to vitamins and to food products. More than 85% of children and adults con-
sume caffeine regularly. Some caffeine users display symptoms consistent with problem-
atic use, including tolerance and withdrawal (see “Caffeine Withdrawal” later in this
chapter); the data are not available at this time to determine the clinical significance of a
caffeine use disorder and its prevalence. In contrast, there is evidence that caffeine with-
drawal and caffeine intoxication are clinically significant and sufficiently prevalent.
The essential feature of caffeine intoxication is recent consumption of caffeine and five
or more signs or symptoms that develop during or shortly after caffeine use (Criteria A
and B). Symptoms include restlessness, nervousness, excitement, insomnia, flushed face,
diuresis, and gastrointestinal complaints, which can occur with low doses (e.g., 200 mg) in
vulnerable individuals such as children, the elderly, or individuals who have not been ex-
posed to caffeine previously. Symptoms that generally appear at levels of more than 1 g/
day include muscle twitching, rambling flow of thought and speech, tachycardia or car-
diac arrhythmia, periods of inexhaustibility, and psychomotor agitation. Caffeine intoxi-
cation may not occur despite high caffeine intake because of the development of tolerance.
The signs or symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The signs or symp-
toms must not be attributable to another medical condition and are not better explained by
another mental disorder (e.g., an anxiety disorder) or intoxication with another substance
(Criterion D).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Mild sensory disturbances (e.g., ringing in the ears and flashes of light) may occur with high
doses of caffeine. Although large doses of caffeine can increase heart rate, smaller doses can
slow heart rate. Whether excess caffeine intake can cause headaches is unclear. On physical
examination, agitation, restlessness, sweating, tachycardia, flushed face, and increased
bowel motility may be seen. Caffeine blood levels may provide important information for
diagnosis, particularly when the individual is a poor historian, although these levels are not
diagnostic by themselves in view of the individual variation in response to caffeine.
Caffeine Intoxication 505
Prevalence
The prevalence of caffeine intoxication in the general population is unclear. In the United
States, approximately 7% of individuals in the population may experience five or more symp-
toms along with functional impairment consistent with a diagnosis of caffeine intoxication.
Development and Course
Consistent with a half-life of caffeine of approximately 4–6 hours, caffeine intoxication
symptoms usually remit within the first day or so and do not have any known long-lasting
consequences. However, individuals who consume very high doses of caffeine (i.e., 5–10
g) may require immediate medical attention, as such doses can be lethal.
With advancing age, individuals are likely to demonstrate increasingly intense reac-
tions to caffeine, with greater complaints of interference with sleep or feelings of hyper-
arousal. Caffeine intoxication among young individuals after consumption of highly
caffeinated products, including energy drinks, has been observed. Children and adoles-
cents may be at increased risk for caffeine intoxication because of low body weight, lack of
tolerance, and lack of knowledge about the pharmacological effects of caffeine.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Caffeine intoxication is often seen among individuals who use caffeine
less frequently or in those who have recently increased their caffeine intake by a substan-
tial amount. Furthermore, oral contraceptives significantly decrease the elimination of caf-
feine and consequently may increase the risk of intoxication.
Genetic and physiological. Genetic factors may affect risk of caffeine intoxication.
Functional Consequences of Caffeine Intoxication
Impairment from caffeine intoxication may have serious consequences, including dys-
function at work or school, social indiscretions, or failure to fulfill role obligations. More-
over, extremely high doses of caffeine can be fatal. In some cases, caffeine intoxication may
precipitate a caffeine-induced disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders. Caffeine intoxication may be characterized by symptoms (e.g.,
panic attacks) that resemble primary mental disorders. To meet criteria for caffeine intoxica-
tion, the symptoms must not be associated with another medical condition or another mental
disorder, such as an anxiety disorder, that could better explain them. Manic episodes; panic
disorder; generalized anxiety disorder; amphetamine intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anx-
iolytic withdrawal or tobacco withdrawal; sleep disorders; and medication-induced side ef-
fects (e.g., akathisia) can cause a clinical picture that is similar to that of caffeine intoxication.
Other caffeine-induced disorders. The temporal relationship of the symptoms to increased
caffeine use or to abstinence from caffeine helps to establish the diagnosis. Caffeine intoxica-
tion is differentiated from caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication
(see “Substance/Medication-Induced Anxiety Disorder” in the chapter “Anxiety Disorders”),
and caffeine-induced sleep disorder, with onset during intoxication (see “Substance/Medica-
tion-Induced Sleep Disorder” in the chapter “Sleep-Wake Disorders”), by the fact that the
symptoms in these latter disorders are in excess of those usually associated with caffeine in-
toxication and are severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
506 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Comorbidity
Typical dietary doses of caffeine have not been consistently associated with medical prob-
lems. However, heavy use (e.g., >400 mg) can cause or exacerbate anxiety and somatic
symptoms and gastrointestinal distress. With acute, extremely high doses of caffeine,
grand mal seizures and respiratory failure may result in death. Excessive caffeine use is as-
sociated with depressive disorders, bipolar disorders, eating disorders, psychotic disor-
ders, sleep disorders, and substance-related disorders, whereas individuals with anxiety
disorders are more likely to avoid caffeine.
Caffeine Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria 292.0 (F15.93)
A. Prolonged daily use of caffeine.
B. Abrupt cessation of or reduction in caffeine use, followed within 24 hours by three (or
more) of the following signs or symptoms:
1. Headache.
2. Marked fatigue or drowsiness.
3. Dysphoric mood, depressed mood, or irritability.
4. Difficulty concentrating.
5. Flu-like symptoms (nausea, vomiting, or muscle pain/stiffness).
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not associated with the physiological effects of another
medical condition (e.g., migraine, viral illness) and are not better explained by another
mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from another substance.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of caffeine withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops after the abrupt cessation of (or substantial reduction in) pro-
longed daily caffeine ingestion (Criterion B). The caffeine withdrawal syndrome is indi-
cated by three or more of the following (Criterion B): headache; marked fatigue or
drowsiness; dysphoric mood, depressed mood, or irritability; difficulty concentrating;
and flu-like symptoms (nausea, vomiting, or muscle pain/stiffness). The withdrawal syn-
drome causes clinical significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be associated with
the physiological effects of another medical condition and are not better explained by an-
other mental disorder (Criterion D).
Headache is the hallmark feature of caffeine withdrawal and may be diffuse, gradual
in development, throbbing, severe, and sensitive to movement. However, other symptoms
of caffeine withdrawal can occur in the absence of headache. Caffeine is the most widely
used behaviorally active drug in the world and is present in many different types of bev-
erages (e.g., coffee, tea, maté, soft drinks, energy drinks), foods, energy aids, medications,
and dietary supplements. Because caffeine ingestion is often integrated into social customs
and daily rituals (e.g., coffee break, tea time), some caffeine consumers may be unaware of
their physical dependence on caffeine. Thus, caffeine withdrawal symptoms could be un-
expected and misattributed to other causes (e.g., the flu, migraine). Furthermore, caffeine
withdrawal symptoms may occur when individuals are required to abstain from foods
and beverages prior to medical procedures or when a usual caffeine dose is missed be-
cause of a change in routine (e.g., during travel, weekends).
Caffeine Withdrawal 507
The probability and severity of caffeine withdrawal generally increase as a function of
usual daily caffeine dose. However, there is large variability among individuals and
within individuals across different episodes in the incidence, severity, and time course of
withdrawal symptoms. Caffeine withdrawal symptoms may occur after abrupt cessation
of relatively low chronic daily doses of caffeine (i.e., 100 mg).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Caffeine abstinence has been shown to be associated with impaired behavioral and cogni-
tive performance (e.g., sustained attention). Electroencephalographic studies have shown
that caffeine withdrawal symptoms are significantly associated with increases in theta
power and decreases in beta-2 power. Decreased motivation to work and decreased socia-
bility have also been reported during caffeine withdrawal. Increased analgesic use during
caffeine withdrawal has been documented.
Prevalence
More than 85% of adults and children in the United States regularly consume caffeine,
with adult caffeine consumers ingesting about 280 mg/day on average. The incidence and
prevalence of the caffeine withdrawal syndrome in the general population are unclear. In
the United States, headache may occur in approximately 50% of cases of caffeine absti-
nence. In attempts to permanently stop caffeine use, more than 70% of individuals may ex-
perience at least one caffeine withdrawal symptom (47% may experience headache), and
24% may experience headache plus one or more other symptoms as well as functional
impairment due to withdrawal. Among individuals who abstain from caffeine for at least
24 hours but are not trying to permanently stop caffeine use, 11% may experience head-
ache plus one or more other symptoms as well as functional impairment. Caffeine con-
sumers can decrease the incidence of caffeine withdrawal by using caffeine daily or only
infrequently (e.g., no more than 2 consecutive days). Gradual reduction in caffeine over a
period of days or weeks may decrease the incidence and severity of caffeine withdrawal.
Development and Course
Symptoms usually begin 12–24 hours after the last caffeine dose and peak after 1–2 days
of abstinence. Caffeine withdrawal symptoms last for 2–9 days, with the possibility of
withdrawal headaches occurring for up to 21 days. Symptoms usually remit rapidly
(within 30–60 minutes) after re-ingestion of caffeine.
Caffeine is unique in that it is a behaviorally active drug that is consumed by individ-
uals of nearly all ages. Rates of caffeine consumption and overall level of caffeine con-
sumption increase with age until the early to mid-30s and then level off. Although caffeine
withdrawal among children and adolescents has been documented, relatively little is
known about risk factors for caffeine withdrawal among this age group. The use of highly
caffeinated energy drinks is increasing with in young individuals, which could increase
the risk for caffeine withdrawal.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Heavy caffeine use has been observed among individuals with mental
disorders, including eating disorders; smokers; prisoners; and drug and alcohol abusers.
Thus, these individuals could be at higher risk for caffeine withdrawal upon acute caffeine
abstinence.
Environmental. The unavailability of caffeine is an environmental risk factor for incipi-
ent withdrawal symptoms. While caffeine is legal and usually widely available, there are
conditions in which caffeine use may be restricted, such as during medical procedures,
pregnancy, hospitalizations, religious observances, wartime, travel, and research partici-
508 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
pation. These external environmental circumstances may precipitate a withdrawal syn-
drome in vulnerable individuals.
Genetic and physiological factors. Genetic factors appear to increase vulnerability to
caffeine withdrawal, but no specific genes have been identified.
Course modifiers. Caffeine withdrawal symptoms usually remit within 30–60 minutes
of reexposure to caffeine. Doses of caffeine significantly less than one’s usual daily dose
may be sufficient to prevent or attenuate caffeine withdrawal symptoms (e.g., consump-
tion of 25 mg by an individual who typically consumes 300 mg).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Habitual caffeine consumers who fast for religious reasons may be at increased risk for caf-
feine withdrawal.
Functional Consequences of
Caffeine Withdrawal Disorder
Caffeine withdrawal symptoms can vary from mild to extreme, at times causing functional
impairment in normal daily activities. Rates of functional impairment range from 10% to
55% (median 13%), with rates as high as 73% found among individuals who also show
other problematic features of caffeine use. Examples of functional impairment include be-
ing unable to work, exercise, or care for children; staying in bed all day; missing religious
services; ending a vacation early; and cancelling a social gathering. Caffeine withdrawal
headaches may be described by individuals as “the worst headaches” ever experienced.
Decrements in cognitive and motor performance have also been observed.
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical disorders and medical side effects. Several disorders should be consid-
ered in the differential diagnosis of caffeine withdrawal. Caffeine withdrawal can mimic
migraine and other headache disorders, viral illnesses, sinus conditions, tension, other
drug withdrawal states (e.g., from amphetamines, cocaine), and medication side effects.
The final determination of caffeine withdrawal should rest on a determination of the pat-
tern and amount consumed, the time interval between caffeine abstinence and onset of
symptoms, and the particular clinical features presented by the individual. A challenge
dose of caffeine followed by symptom remission may be used to confirm the diagnosis.
Comorbidity
Caffeine withdrawal may be associated with major depressive disorder, generalized anx-
iety disorder, panic disorder, antisocial personality disorder in adults, moderate to severe
alcohol use disorder, and cannabis and cocaine use.
Other Caffeine-Induced Disorders
The following caffeine-induced disorders are described in other chapters of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-
induced mental disorders in these chapters): caffeine-induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety
Disorders”) and caffeine-induced sleep disorder (“Sleep-Wake Disorders”). These caf-
feine-induced disorders are diagnosed instead of caffeine intoxication or caffeine with-
drawal only when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical
attention.
Unspecified Caffeine-Related Disorder 509
Unspecified Caffeine-Related Disorder
292.9 (F15.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a caffeine-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific caffeine-related disorder or any of the disorders in the substance-related
and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Cannabis-Related Disorders
Cannabis Use Disorder
Cannabis Intoxication
Cannabis Withdrawal
Other Cannabis-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Cannabis-Related Disorder
Cannabis Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A problematic pattern of cannabis use leading to clinically significant impairment or dis-
tress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. Cannabis is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control cannabis use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain cannabis, use canna-
bis, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis.
5. Recurrent cannabis use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work,
school, or home.
6. Continued cannabis use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interper-
sonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of cannabis.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of cannabis use.
8. Recurrent cannabis use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Cannabis use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated
by cannabis.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of cannabis to achieve intoxication or
desired effect.
b. Markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of cannabis.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for cannabis (refer to Criteria A and B
of the criteria set for cannabis withdrawal, pp. 517–518).
510 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
b. Cannabis (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal
symptoms.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for cannabis use disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but
for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong de-
sire or urge to use cannabis,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for cannabis use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder have been met at any time during a
period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
strong desire or urge to use cannabis,” may be present).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to cannabis is restricted.
Code based on current severity: Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If a cannabis intoxication,
cannabis withdrawal, or another cannabis-induced mental disorder is also present, do not
use the codes below for cannabis use disorder. Instead, the comorbid cannabis use disorder
is indicated in the 4th character of the cannabis-induced disorder code (see the coding note
for cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, or a specific cannabis-induced mental disor-
der). For example, if there is comorbid cannabis-induced anxiety disorder and cannabis use
disorder, only the cannabis-induced anxiety disorder code is given, with the 4th character
indicating whether the comorbid cannabis use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe:
F12.180 for mild cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced anxiety disorder or F12.280
for a moderate or severe cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced anxiety disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.20 (F12.10) Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.30 (F12.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.30 (F12.20) Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these
environments are closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units.
Changing severity across time in an individual may also be reflected by changes in the
frequency (e.g., days of use per month or times used per day) and/or dose (e.g., amount
used per episode) of cannabis, as assessed by individual self-report, report of knowledge-
able others, clinician’s observations, and biological testing.
Diagnostic Features
Cannabis use disorder and the other cannabis-related disorders include problems that are
associated with substances derived from the cannabis plant and chemically similar syn-
thetic compounds. Over time, this plant material has accumulated many names (e.g.,
weed, pot, herb, grass, reefer, mary jane, dagga, dope, bhang, skunk, boom, gangster, kif,
and ganja). A concentrated extraction of the cannabis plant that is also commonly used is
hashish. Cannabis is the generic and perhaps the most appropriate scientific term for the
psychoactive substance(s) derived from the plant, and as such it is used in this manual
to refer to all forms of cannabis-like substances, including synthetic cannabinoid com-
pounds.
Cannabis Use Disorder 511
Synthetic oral formulations (pill/capsules) of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-
THC) are available by prescription for a number of approved medical indications (e.g., for
nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy; for anorexia and weight loss in individuals
with AIDS). Other synthetic cannabinoid compounds have been manufactured and dis-
tributed for nonmedical use in the form of plant material that has been sprayed with a can-
nabinoid formulation (e.g., K2, Spice, JWH-018, JWH-073).
The cannabinoids have diverse effects in the brain, prominent among which are actions
on CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors that are found throughout the central nervous sys-
tem. Endogenous ligands for these receptors behave essentially like neurotransmitters.
The potency of cannabis (delta-9-THC concentration) that is generally available varies
greatly, ranging from 1% to approximately 15% in typical cannabis plant material and
10%–20% in hashish. During the past two decades, a steady increase in the potency of
seized cannabis has been observed.
Cannabis is most commonly smoked via a variety of methods: pipes, water pipes
(bongs or hookahs), cigarettes (joints or reefers), or, most recently, in the paper from hol-
lowed out cigars (blunts). Cannabis is also sometimes ingested orally, typically by mixing
it into food. More recently, devices have been developed in which cannabis is “vapor-
ized.” Vaporization involves heating the plant material to release psychoactive cannabi-
noids for inhalation. As with other psychoactive substances, smoking (and vaporization)
typically produces more rapid onset and more intense experiences of the desired effects.
Individuals who regularly use cannabis can develop all the general diagnostic features
of a substance use disorder. Cannabis use disorder is commonly observed as the only sub-
stance use disorder experienced by the individual; however, it also frequently occurs con-
currently with other types of substance use disorders (i.e., alcohol, cocaine, opioid). In
cases for which multiple types of substances are used, many times the individual may
minimize the symptoms related to cannabis, as the symptoms may be less severe or cause
less harm than those directly related to the use of the other substances. Pharmacological
and behavioral tolerance to most of the effects of cannabis has been reported in individuals
who use cannabis persistently. Generally, tolerance is lost when cannabis use is discontin-
ued for a significant period of time (i.e., for at least several months).
New to DSM-5 is the recognition that abrupt cessation of daily or near-daily cannabis
use often results in the onset of a cannabis withdrawal syndrome. Common symptoms of
withdrawal include irritability, anger or aggression, anxiety, depressed mood, restless-
ness, sleep difficulty, and decreased appetite or weight loss. Although typically not as
severe as alcohol or opiate withdrawal, the cannabis withdrawal syndrome can cause sig-
nificant distress and contribute to difficulty quitting or relapse among those trying to
abstain.
Individuals with cannabis use disorder may use cannabis throughout the day over a
period of months or years, and thus may spend many hours a day under the influence.
Others may use less frequently, but their use causes recurrent problems related to family,
school, work, or other important activities (e.g., repeated absences at work; neglect of fam-
ily obligations). Periodic cannabis use and intoxication can negatively affect behavioral
and cognitive functioning and thus interfere with optimal performance at work or school,
or place the individual at increased physical risk when performing activities that could be
physically hazardous (e.g., driving a car; playing certain sports; performing manual work
activities, including operating machinery). Arguments with spouses or parents over the
use of cannabis in the home, or its use in the presence of children, can adversely impact
family functioning and are common features of those with cannabis use disorder. Last, in-
dividuals with cannabis use disorder may continue using despite knowledge of physical
problems (e.g., chronic cough related to smoking) or psychological problems (e.g., exces-
sive sedation or exacerbation of other mental health problems) associated with its use.
Whether or not cannabis is being used for legitimate medical reasons may also affect
diagnosis. When a substance is taken as indicated for a medical condition, symptoms of
512 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
tolerance and withdrawal will naturally occur and should not be used as the primary cri-
teria for determining a diagnosis of a substance use disorder. Although medical uses of
cannabis remain controversial and equivocal, use for medical circumstances should be
considered when a diagnosis is being made.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals who regularly use cannabis often report that it is being used to cope with
mood, sleep, pain, or other physiological or psychological problems, and those diagnosed
with cannabis use disorder frequently do have concurrent other mental disorders. Careful
assessment typically reveals reports of cannabis use contributing to exacerbation of these
same symptoms, as well as other reasons for frequent use (e.g., to experience euphoria, to
forget about problems, in response to anger, as an enjoyable social activity). Related to this
issue, some individuals who use cannabis multiple times per day for the aforementioned
reasons do not perceive themselves as (and thus do not report) spending an excessive
amount of time under the influence or recovering from the effects of cannabis, despite be-
ing intoxicated on cannabis or coming down from it effects for the majority of most days.
An important marker of a substance use disorder diagnosis, particularly in milder cases, is
continued use despite a clear risk of negative consequences to other valued activities or re-
lationships (e.g., school, work, sport activity, partner or parent relationship).
Because some cannabis users are motivated to minimize their amount or frequency of
use, it is important to be aware of common signs and symptoms of cannabis use and intox-
ication so as to better assess the extent of use. As with other substances, experienced users
of cannabis develop behavioral and pharmacological tolerance such that it can be difficult
to detect when they are under the influence. Signs of acute and chronic use include red eyes
(conjunctival injection), cannabis odor on clothing, yellowing of finger tips (from smoking
joints), chronic cough, burning of incense (to hide the odor), and exaggerated craving and
impulse for specific foods, sometimes at unusual times of the day or night.
Prevalence
Cannabinoids, especially cannabis, are the most widely used illicit psychoactive sub-
stances in the United States. The 12-month prevalence of cannabis use disorder (DSM-IV
abuse and dependence rates combined) is approximately 3.4% among 12- to 17-year-olds
and 1.5% among adults age 18 years and older. Rates of cannabis use disorder are greater
among adult males (2.2%) than among adult females (0.8%) and among 12- to 17-year-old
males (3.8%) than among 12- to 17-year-old females (3.0%). Twelve-month prevalence
rates of cannabis use disorder among adults decrease with age, with rates highest among
18- to 29-year-olds (4.4%) and lowest among individuals age 65 years and older (0.01%).
The high prevalence of cannabis use disorder likely reflects the much more widespread
use of cannabis relative to other illicit drugs rather than greater addictive potential.
Ethnic and racial differences in prevalence are moderate. Twelve-month prevalences
of cannabis use disorder vary markedly across racial-ethnic subgroups in the United
States. For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are highest among Native American and Alaska Na-
tives (7.1%) compared with Hispanics (4.1%), whites (3.4%), African Americans (2.7%),
and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.9%). Among adults, the prevalence of can-
nabis use disorder is also highest among Native Americans and Alaska Natives (3.4%) rel-
ative to rates among African Americans (1.8%), whites (1.4%), Hispanics (1.2%), and Asian
and Pacific Islanders (1.2%). During the past decade the prevalence of cannabis use disor-
der has increased among adults and adolescents. Gender differences in cannabis use dis-
order generally are concordant with those in other substance use disorders. Cannabis use
disorder is more commonly observed in males, although the magnitude of this difference
is less among adolescents.
Cannabis Use Disorder 513
Development and Course
The onset of cannabis use disorder can occur at any time during or following adolescence,
but onset is most commonly during adolescence or young adulthood. Although much less
frequent, onset of cannabis use disorder in the preteen years or in the late 20s or older can
occur. Recent acceptance by some of the use and availability of “medical marijuana” may
increase the rate of onset of cannabis use disorder among older adults.
Generally, cannabis use disorder develops over an extended period of time, although
the progression appears to be more rapid in adolescents, particularly those with pervasive
conduct problems. Most people who develop a cannabis use disorder typically establish a
pattern of cannabis use that gradually increases in both frequency and amount. Cannabis,
along with tobacco and alcohol, is traditionally the first substance that adolescents try.
Many perceive cannabis use as less harmful than alcohol or tobacco use, and this percep-
tion likely contributes to increased use. Moreover, cannabis intoxication does not typically
result in as severe behavioral and cognitive dysfunction as does significant alcohol intox-
ication, which may increase the probability of more frequent use in more diverse situa-
tions than with alcohol. These factors likely contribute to the potential rapid transition
from cannabis use to a cannabis use disorder among some adolescents and the common
pattern of using throughout the day that is commonly observed among those with more
severe cannabis use disorder.
Cannabis use disorder among preteens, adolescents, and young adults is typically ex-
pressed as excessive use with peers that is a component of a pattern of other delinquent
behaviors usually associated with conduct problems. Milder cases primarily reflect con-
tinued use despite clear problems related to disapproval of use by other peers, school ad-
ministration, or family, which also places the youth at risk for physical or behavioral
consequences. In more severe cases, there is a progression to using alone or using through-
out the day such that use interferes with daily functioning and takes the place of previ-
ously established, prosocial activities.
With adolescent users, changes in mood stability, energy level, and eating patterns are
commonly observed. These signs and symptoms are likely due to the direct effects of can-
nabis use (intoxication) and the subsequent effects following acute intoxication (coming
down), as well as attempts to conceal use from others. School-related problems are com-
monly associated with cannabis use disorder in adolescents, particularly a dramatic drop
in grades, truancy, and reduced interest in general school activities and outcomes.
Cannabis use disorder among adults typically involves well-established patterns of daily
cannabis use that continue despite clear psychosocial or medical problems. Many adults have
experienced repeated desire to stop or have failed at repeated cessation attempts. Milder adult
cases may resemble the more common adolescent cases in that cannabis use is not as frequent
or heavy but continues despite potential significant consequences of sustained use. The rate of
use among middle-age and older adults appears to be increasing, likely because of a cohort ef-
fect resulting from high prevalence of use in the late 1960s and the 1970s.
Early onset of cannabis use (e.g., prior to age 15 years) is a robust predictor of the de-
velopment of cannabis use disorder and other types of substance use disorders and mental
disorders during young adulthood. Such early onset is likely related to concurrent other
externalizing problems, most notably conduct disorder symptoms. However, early onset
is also a predictor of internalizing problems and as such probably reflects a general risk
factor for the development of mental health disorders.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. A history of conduct disorder in childhood or adolescence and antiso-
cial personality disorder are risk factors for the development of many substance-related
disorders, including cannabis-related disorders. Other risk factors include externalizing
514 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
or internalizing disorders during childhood or adolescence. Youths with high behavioral
disinhibition scores show early-onset substance use disorders, including cannabis use dis-
order, multiple substance involvement, and early conduct problems.
Environmental. Risk factors include academic failure, tobacco smoking, unstable or abu-
sive family situation, use of cannabis among immediate family members, a family history
of a substance use disorder, and low socioeconomic status. As with all substances of abuse,
the ease of availability of the substance is a risk factor; cannabis is relatively easy to obtain
in most cultures, which increases the risk of developing a cannabis use disorder.
Genetic and physiological. Genetic influences contribute to the development of canna-
bis use disorders. Heritable factors contribute between 30% and 80% of the total variance
in risk of cannabis use disorders. It should be noted that common genetic and shared en-
vironmental influences between cannabis and other types of substance use disorders sug-
gest a common genetic basis for adolescent substance use and conduct problems.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cannabis is probably the world’s most commonly used illicit substance. Occurrence of
cannabis use disorder across countries is unknown, but the prevalence rates are likely sim-
ilar among developed countries. It is frequently among the first drugs of experimentation
(often in the teens) of all cultural groups in the United States.
Acceptance of cannabis for medical purposes varies widely across and within cultures.
Cultural factors (acceptability and legal status) that might impact diagnosis relate to dif-
ferential consequences across cultures for detection of use (i.e., arrest, school suspensions,
or employment suspension). The general change in substance use disorder diagnostic cri-
teria from DSM-IV to DSM-5 (i.e., removal of the recurrent substance-related legal prob-
lems criterion) mitigates this concern to some degree.
Diagnostic Markers
Biological tests for cannabinoid metabolites are useful for determining if an individual has
recently used cannabis. Such testing is helpful in making a diagnosis, particularly in
milder cases if an individual denies using while others (family, work, school) purport con-
cern about a substance use problem. Because cannabinoids are fat soluble, they persist in
bodily fluids for extended periods of time and are excreted slowly. Expertise in urine test-
ing methods is needed to reliably interpret results.
Functional Consequences of Cannabis Use Disorder
Functional consequences of cannabis use disorder are part of the diagnostic criteria. Many
areas of psychosocial, cognitive, and health functioning may be compromised in relation
to cannabis use disorder. Cognitive function, particularly higher executive function, ap-
pears to be compromised in cannabis users, and this relationship appears to be dose de-
pendent (both acutely and chronically). This may contribute to increased difficulty at
school or work. Cannabis use has been related to a reduction in prosocial goal-directed ac-
tivity, which some have labeled an amotivational syndrome, that manifests itself in poor
school performance and employment problems. These problems may be related to perva-
sive intoxication or recovery from the effects of intoxication. Similarly, cannabis-associated
problems with social relationships are commonly reported in those with cannabis use dis-
order. Accidents due to engagement in potentially dangerous behaviors while under the
influence (e.g., driving, sport, recreational or employment activities) are also of concern.
Cannabis smoke contains high levels of carcinogenic compounds that place chronic users
at risk for respiratory illnesses similar to those experienced by tobacco smokers. Chronic
cannabis use may contribute to the onset or exacerbation of many other mental disorders.
In particular, concern has been raised about cannabis use as a causal factor in schizophrenia
and other psychotic disorders. Cannabis use can contribute to the onset of an acute psy-
Cannabis Use Disorder 515
chotic episode, can exacerbate some symptoms, and can adversely affect treatment of a
major psychotic illness.
Differential Diagnosis
Nonproblematic use of cannabis. The distinction between nonproblematic use of can-
nabis and cannabis use disorder can be difficult to make because social, behavioral, or psy-
chological problems may be difficult to attribute to the substance, especially in the context
of use of other substances. Also, denial of heavy cannabis use and the attribution that can-
nabis is related to or causing substantial problems are common among individuals who
are referred to treatment by others (i.e., school, family, employer, criminal justice system).
Other mental disorders. Cannabis-induced disorder may be characterized by symp-
toms (e.g., anxiety) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., generalized anxiety dis-
order vs. cannabis-induced anxiety disorder, with generalized anxiety, with onset during
intoxication). Chronic intake of cannabis can produce a lack of motivation that resembles
persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia). Acute adverse reactions to cannabis should be
differentiated from the symptoms of panic disorder, major depressive disorder, delusional
disorder, bipolar disorder, or schizophrenia, paranoid type. Physical examination will
usually show an increased pulse and conjunctival injection. Urine toxicological testing can
be helpful in making a diagnosis.
Comorbidity
Cannabis has been commonly thought of as a “gateway” drug because individuals who
frequently use cannabis have a much greater lifetime probability than nonusers of using
what are commonly considered more dangerous substances, like opioids or cocaine. Can-
nabis use and cannabis use disorder are highly comorbid with other substance use disor-
ders. Co-occurring mental conditions are common in cannabis use disorder. Cannabis use
has been associated with poorer life satisfaction; increased mental health treatment and
hospitalization; and higher rates of depression, anxiety disorders, suicide attempts, and
conduct disorder. Individuals with past-year or lifetime cannabis use disorder have high
rates of alcohol use disorder (greater than 50%) and tobacco use disorder (53%). Rates of
other substance use disorders are also likely to be high among individuals with cannabis
use disorder. Among those seeking treatment for a cannabis use disorder, 74% report
problematic use of a secondary or tertiary substance: alcohol (40%), cocaine (12%), meth-
amphetamine (6%), and heroin or other opiates (2%). Among those younger than 18 years,
61% reported problematic use of a secondary substance: alcohol (48%), cocaine (4%), meth-
amphetamine (2%), and heroin or other opiates (2%). Cannabis use disorder is also often
observed as a secondary problem among those with a primary diagnosis of other substance
use disorders, with approximately 25%–80% of those in treatment for another substance
use disorder reporting use of cannabis.
Individuals with past-year or lifetime diagnoses of cannabis use disorder also have
high rates of concurrent mental disorders other than substance use disorders. Major de-
pressive disorder (11%), any anxiety disorder (24%), and bipolar I disorder (13%) are quite
common among individuals with a past-year diagnosis of a cannabis use disorder, as are
antisocial (30%), obsessive-compulsive, (19%), and paranoid (18%) personality disorders.
Approximately 33% of adolescents with cannabis use disorder have internalizing disor-
ders (e.g., anxiety, depression, posttraumatic stress disorder), and 60% have externalizing
disorders (e.g., conduct disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
Although cannabis use can impact multiple aspects of normal human functioning, in-
cluding the cardiovascular, immune, neuromuscular, ocular, reproductive, and respira-
tory systems, as well as appetite and cognition/perception, there are few clear medical
conditions that commonly co-occur with cannabis use disorder. The most significant health
516 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
effects of cannabis involve the respiratory system, and chronic cannabis smokers exhibit
high rates of respiratory symptoms of bronchitis, sputum production, shortness of breath,
and wheezing.
Cannabis Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of cannabis.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., impaired
motor coordination, euphoria, anxiety, sensation of slowed time, impaired judgment,
social withdrawal) that developed during, or shortly after, cannabis use.
C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing within 2 hours of canna-
bis use:
1. Conjunctival injection.
2. Increased appetite.
3. Dry mouth.
4. Tachycardia.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better
explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another substance.
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances: Hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, vi-
sual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89. The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
or not there is a comorbid cannabis use disorder and whether or not there are perceptual
disturbances.
For cannabis intoxication, without perceptual disturbances: If a mild cannabis use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.129, and if a moderate or severe
cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.229. If there is no co-
morbid cannabis use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F12.929.
For cannabis intoxication, with perceptual disturbances: If a mild cannabis use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.122, and if a moderate or severe
cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.222. If there is no co-
morbid cannabis use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F12.922.
Specifiers
When hallucinations occur in the absence of intact reality testing, a diagnosis of substance/
medication-induced psychotic disorder should be considered.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of cannabis intoxication is the presence of clinically significant prob-
lematic behavioral or psychological changes that develop during, or shortly after, canna-
bis use (Criterion B). Intoxication typically begins with a “high” feeling followed by
symptoms that include euphoria with inappropriate laughter and grandiosity, sedation,
lethargy, impairment in short-term memory, difficulty carrying out complex mental pro-
cesses, impaired judgment, distorted sensory perceptions, impaired motor performance,
and the sensation that time is passing slowly. Occasionally, anxiety (which can be severe),
Cannabis Withdrawal 517
dysphoria, or social withdrawal occurs. These psychoactive effects are accompanied by
two or more of the following signs, developing within 2 hours of cannabis use: conjuncti-
val injection, increased appetite, dry mouth, and tachycardia (Criterion C).
Intoxication develops within minutes if the cannabis is smoked but may take a few
hours to develop if the cannabis is ingested orally. The effects usually last 3–4 hours, with
the duration being somewhat longer when the substance is ingested orally. The magnitude
of the behavioral and physiological changes depends on the dose, the method of adminis-
tration, and the characteristics of the individual using the substance, such as rate of absorp-
tion, tolerance, and sensitivity to the effects of the substance. Because most cannabinoids,
including delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC), are fat soluble, the effects of canna-
bis or hashish may occasionally persist or reoccur for 12–24 hours because of the slow re-
lease of psychoactive substances from fatty tissue or to enterohepatic circulation.
Prevalence
The prevalence of actual episodes of cannabis intoxication in the general population is un-
known. However, it is probable that most cannabis users would at some time meet criteria
for cannabis intoxication. Given this, the prevalence of cannabis users and the prevalence
of individuals experiencing cannabis intoxication are likely similar.
Functional Consequences of Cannabis Intoxication
Impairment from cannabis intoxication may have serious consequences, including dys-
function at work or school, social indiscretions, failure to fulfill role obligations, traffic ac-
cidents, and having unprotected sex. In rare cases, cannabis intoxication may precipitate a
psychosis that may vary in duration.
Differential Diagnosis
Note that if the clinical presentation includes hallucinations in the absence of intact reality
testing, a diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder should be con-
sidered.
Other substance intoxication. Cannabis intoxication may resemble intoxication with
other types of substances. However, in contrast to cannabis intoxication, alcohol intoxica-
tion and sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication frequently decrease appetite, in-
crease aggressive behavior, and produce nystagmus or ataxia. Hallucinogens in low doses
may cause a clinical picture that resembles cannabis intoxication. Phencyclidine, like can-
nabis, can be smoked and also causes perceptual changes, but phencyclidine intoxication
is much more likely to cause ataxia and aggressive behavior.
Other cannabis-induced disorders. Cannabis intoxication is distinguished from the other
cannabis-induced disorders (e.g., cannabis-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during
intoxication) because the symptoms in these latter disorders predominate the clinical pre-
sentation and are severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
Cannabis Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria 292.0 (F12.288)
A. Cessation of cannabis use that has been heavy and prolonged (i.e., usually daily or
almost daily use over a period of at least a few months).
B. Three (or more) of the following signs and symptoms develop within approximately 1 week
after Criterion A:
518 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
1. Irritability, anger, or aggression.
2. Nervousness or anxiety.
3. Sleep difficulty (e.g., insomnia, disturbing dreams).
4. Decreased appetite or weight loss.
5. Restlessness.
6. Depressed mood.
7. At least one of the following physical symptoms causing significant discomfort: ab-
dominal pain, shakiness/tremors, sweating, fever, chills, or headache.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from
another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 292.0. The ICD-10-CM code for cannabis withdrawal
is F12.288. Note that the ICD-10-CM code indicates the comorbid presence of a moderate
or severe cannabis use disorder, reflecting the fact that cannabis withdrawal can only oc-
cur in the presence of a moderate or severe cannabis use disorder. It is not permissible to
code a comorbid mild cannabis use disorder with cannabis withdrawal.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of cannabis withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops after the cessation of or substantial reduction in heavy and pro-
longed cannabis use. In addition to the symptoms in Criterion B, the following may also be
observed postabstinence: fatigue, yawning, difficulty concentrating, and rebound periods
of increased appetite and hypersomnia that follow initial periods of loss of appetite and in-
somnia. For the diagnosis, withdrawal symptoms must cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion
C). Many cannabis users report smoking cannabis or taking other substances to help re-
lieve withdrawal symptoms, and many report that withdrawal symptoms make quitting
difficult or have contributed to relapse. The symptoms typically are not of sufficient se-
verity to require medical attention, but medication or behavioral strategies may help alle-
viate symptoms and improve prognosis in those trying to quit using cannabis.
Cannabis withdrawal is commonly observed in individuals seeking treatment for can-
nabis use as well as in heavy cannabis users who are not seeking treatment. Among indi-
viduals who have used cannabis regularly during some period of their lifetime, up to one-
third report having experienced cannabis withdrawal. Among adults and adolescents en-
rolled in treatment or heavy cannabis users, 50%–95% report cannabis withdrawal. These
findings indicate that cannabis withdrawal occurs among a substantial subset of regular
cannabis users who try to quit.
Development and Course
The amount, duration, and frequency of cannabis smoking that is required to produce an
associated withdrawal disorder during a quit attempt are unknown. Most symptoms have
their onset within the first 24–72 hours of cessation, peak within the first week, and last
approximately 1–2 weeks. Sleep difficulties may last more than 30 days. Cannabis with-
drawal has been documented among adolescents and adults. Withdrawal tends to be more
common and severe among adults, most likely related to the more persistent and greater
frequency and quantity of use among adults.
Unspecified Cannabis-Related Disorder 519
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Most likely, the prevalence and severity of cannabis withdrawal are
greater among heavier cannabis users, and particularly among those seeking treatment for
cannabis use disorders. Withdrawal severity also appears to be positively related to the se-
verity of comorbid symptoms of mental disorders.
Functional Consequences of Cannabis Withdrawal
Cannabis users report using cannabis to relieve withdrawal symptoms, suggesting that
withdrawal might contribute to ongoing expression of cannabis use disorder. Worse out-
comes may be associated with greater withdrawal. A substantial proportion of adults and
adolescents in treatment for moderate to severe cannabis use disorder acknowledge mod-
erate to severe withdrawal symptoms, and many complain that these symptoms make ces-
sation more difficult. Cannabis users report having relapsed to cannabis use or initiating
use of other drugs (e.g., tranquilizers) to provide relief from cannabis withdrawal symp-
toms. Last, individuals living with cannabis users observe significant withdrawal effects,
suggesting that such symptoms are disruptive to daily living.
Differential Diagnosis
Because many of the symptoms of cannabis withdrawal are also symptoms of other sub-
stance withdrawal syndromes or of depressive or bipolar disorders, careful evaluation
should focus on ensuring that the symptoms are not better explained by cessation from an-
other substance (e.g., tobacco or alcohol withdrawal), another mental disorder (general-
ized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder), or another medical condition.
Other Cannabis-Induced Disorders
The following cannabis-induced disorders are described in other chapters of the manual with
disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-induced
mental disorders in these chapters): cannabis-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia
Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); cannabis-induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety
Disorders”); and cannabis-induced sleep disorder (“Sleep-Wake Disorders”). For cannabis
intoxication delirium, see the criteria and discussion of delirium in the chapter “Neurocog-
nitive Disorders.” These cannabis-induced disorders are diagnosed instead of cannabis in-
toxication or cannabis withdrawal when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention.
Unspecified Cannabis-Related Disorder
292.9 (F12.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a cannabis-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific cannabis-related disorder or any of the disorders in the substance-related
and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
520 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Hallucinogen-Related Disorders
Phencyclidine Use Disorder
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
Phencyclidine Intoxication
Other Hallucinogen Intoxication
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder
Other Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders
Other Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Phencyclidine-Related Disorder
Unspecified Hallucinogen-Related Disorder
Phencyclidine Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A pattern of phencyclidine (or a pharmacologically similar substance) use leading to
clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the follow-
ing, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. Phencyclidine is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was in-
tended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control phency-
clidine use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain phencyclidine, use the
phencyclidine, or recover from its effects.
4. 5. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use phencyclidine.
Recurrent phencyclidine use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from work or poor work performance
related to phencyclidine use; phencyclidine-related absences, suspensions, or ex-
pulsions from school; neglect of children or household).
6. Continued phencyclidine use despite having persistent or recurrent social or inter-
personal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the phencyclidine (e.g.,
arguments with a spouse about consequences of intoxication; physical fights).
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of phencyclidine use.
8. Recurrent phencyclidine use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (e.g.,
driving an automobile or operating a machine when impaired by a phencyclidine).
9. Phencyclidine use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recur-
rent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exac-
erbated by the phencyclidine.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the phencyclidine to achieve intoxi-
cation or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the
phencyclidine.
Phencyclidine Use Disorder 521
Note: Withdrawal symptoms and signs are not established for phencyclidines, and so this
criterion does not apply. (Withdrawal from phencyclidines has been reported in animals
but not documented in human users.)
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for phencyclidine use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for phencyclidine use disorder have been met for at least
3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving,
or a strong desire or urge to use the phencyclidine,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for phencyclidine use disorder were previ-
ously met, none of the criteria for phencyclidine use disorder have been met at any time
during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving,
or a strong desire or urge to use the phencyclidine,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to phencyclidines is restricted.
Coding based on current severity: Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If a phencyclidine intoxica-
tion or another phencyclidine-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes
below for phencyclidine use disorder. Instead, the comorbid phencyclidine use disorder is in-
dicated in the 4th character of the phencyclidine-induced disorder code (see the coding note
for phencyclidine intoxication or a specific phencyclidine-induced mental disorder). For ex-
ample, if there is comorbid phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder, only the phencyclidine-
induced psychotic disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the co-
morbid phencyclidine use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F16.159 for mild phencycli-
dine use disorder with phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder or F16.259 for a moderate
or severe phencyclidine use disorder with phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.90 (F16.10) Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.60 (F16.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.60 (F16.20) Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these
environments are closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units.
Diagnostic Features
The phencyclidines (or phencyclidine-like substances) include phencyclidine (e.g., PCP,
“angel dust”) and less potent but similarly acting compounds such as ketamine, cyclohex-
amine, and dizocilpine. These substances were first developed as dissociative anesthetics
in the 1950s and became street drugs in the 1960s. They produce feelings of separation
from mind and body (hence “dissociative”) in low doses, and at high doses, stupor and
coma can result. These substances are most commonly smoked or taken orally, but they
may also be snorted or injected. Although the primary psychoactive effects of PCP last for
a few hours, the total elimination rate of this drug from the body typically extends 8 days
or longer. The hallucinogenic effects in vulnerable individuals may last for weeks and may
precipitate a persistent psychotic episode resembling schizophrenia. Ketamine has been
observed to have utility in the treatment of major depressive disorder. Withdrawal symp-
522 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
toms have not been clearly established in humans, and therefore the withdrawal criterion
is not included in the diagnosis of phencyclidine use disorder.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Phencyclidine may be detected in urine for up to 8 days or even longer at very high doses. In
addition to laboratory tests to detect its presence, characteristic symptoms resulting from
intoxication with phencyclidine or related substances may aid in its diagnosis. Phencycli-
dine is likely to produce dissociative symptoms, analgesia, nystagmus, and hypertension,
with risk of hypotension and shock. Violent behavior can also occur with phencyclidine
use, as intoxicated persons may believe that they are being attacked. Residual symptoms
following use may resemble schizophrenia.
Prevalence
The prevalence of phencyclidine use disorder is unknown. Approximately 2.5% of the pop-
ulation reports having ever used phencyclidine. The proportion of users increases with
age, from 0.3% of 12- to 17-year-olds, to 1.3% of 18- to 25-year-olds, to 2.9% of those age 26
years and older reporting ever using phencyclidine. There appears to have been an in-
crease among 12th graders in both ever used (to 2.3% from 1.8%) and past-year use (to 1.3%
from 1.0%) of phencyclidine. Past-year use of ketamine appears relatively stable among
12th graders (1.6%–1.7% over the past 3 years).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
There is little information about risk factors for phencyclidine use disorder. Among indi-
viduals admitted to substance abuse treatment, those for whom phencyclidine was the
primary substance were younger than those admitted for other substance use, had lower
educational levels, and were more likely to be located in the West and Northeast regions of
the United States, compared with other admissions.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Ketamine use in youths ages 16–23 years has been reported to be more common among
whites (0.5%) than among other ethnic groups (range 0%–0.3%). Among individuals ad-
mitted to substance abuse treatment, those for whom phencyclidine was the primary sub-
stance were predominantly black (49%) or Hispanic (29%).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males make up about three-quarters of those with phencyclidine-related emergency room
visits.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory testing may be useful, as phencyclidine is present in the urine in intoxicated in-
dividuals up to 8 days after ingestion. The individual’s history, along with certain physical
signs, such as nystagmus, analgesia and prominent hypertension, may aid in distinguish-
ing the phencyclidine clinical picture from that of other hallucinogens.
Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine Use Disorder
In individuals with phencyclidine use disorder, there may be physical evidence of injuries
from accidents, fights, and falls. Chronic use of phencyclidine may lead to deficits in mem-
ory, speech, and cognition that may last for months. Cardiovascular and neurological tox-
icities (e.g., seizures, dystonias, dyskinesias, catalepsy, hypothermia or hyperthermia)
may result from intoxication with phencyclidine. Other consequences include intracranial
hemorrhage, rhabdomyolysis, respiratory problems, and (occasionally) cardiac arrest.
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder 523
Differential Diagnosis
Other substance use disorders. Distinguishing the effects of phencyclidine from those
of other substances is important, since it may be a common additive to other substances
(e.g., cannabis, cocaine).
Schizophrenia and other mental disorders. Some of the effects of phencyclidine and
related substance use may resemble symptoms of other psychiatric disorders, such as psy-
chosis (schizophrenia), low mood (major depressive disorder), violent aggressive be-
haviors (conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder). Discerning whether these
behaviors occurred before the intake of the drug is important in the differentiation of acute
drug effects from preexisting mental disorder. Phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder
should be considered when there is impaired reality testing in individuals experiencing
disturbances in perception resulting from ingestion of phencyclidine.
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A problematic pattern of hallucinogen (other than phencyclidine) use leading to clini-
cally significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following,
occurring within a 12-month period:
1. The hallucinogen is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control halluci-
nogen use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the hallucinogen, use
the hallucinogen, or recover from its effects.
4. 5. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen.
Recurrent hallucinogen use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from work or poor work perfor-
mance related to hallucinogen use; hallucinogen-related absences, suspensions,
or expulsions from school; neglect of children or household).
6. Continued hallucinogen use despite having persistent or recurrent social or inter-
personal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the hallucinogen (e.g.,
arguments with a spouse about consequences of intoxication; physical fights).
7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of hallucinogen use.
8. Recurrent hallucinogen use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (e.g.,
driving an automobile or operating a machine when impaired by the hallucinogen).
9. Hallucinogen use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recur-
rent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exac-
erbated by the hallucinogen.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the hallucinogen to achieve intoxi-
cation or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the hal-
lucinogen.
Note: Withdrawal symptoms and signs are not established for hallucinogens, and so this
criterion does not apply.
524 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Specify the particular hallucinogen.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder were previ-
ously met, none of the criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder have been met for
at least 3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
“Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder have been met
at any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4,
“Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment: This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to hallucinogens is restricted.
Coding based on current severity: Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If a hallucinogen intoxication
or another hallucinogen-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes below
for hallucinogen use disorder. Instead, the comorbid hallucinogen use disorder is indicated in
the 4th character of the hallucinogen-induced disorder code (see the coding note for halluci-
nogen intoxication or specific hallucinogen-induced mental disorder). For example, if there is
comorbid hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder and hallucinogen use disorder, only the
hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating wheth-
er the comorbid hallucinogen use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F16.159 for mild hal-
lucinogen use disorder with hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder or F16.259 for a
moderate or severe hallucinogen use disorder with hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.30 (F16.10) Mild: Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.50 (F16.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.50 (F16.20) Severe: Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these
environments are closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units.
Diagnostic Features
Hallucinogens comprise a diverse group of substances that, despite having different chem-
ical structures and possibly involving different molecular mechanisms, produce similar
alterations of perception, mood, and cognition in users. Hallucinogens included are phenyl-
alkylamines (e.g., mescaline, DOM [2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine], and MDMA
[3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine; also called “ecstasy”]); the indoleamines, includ-
ing psilocybin (i.e., psilocin) and dimethyltryptamine (DMT); and the ergolines, such as LSD
(lysergic acid diethylamide) and morning glory seeds. In addition, miscellaneous other
ethnobotanical compounds are classified as “hallucinogens,” of which Salvia divinorum and
jimsonweed are two examples. Excluded from the hallucinogen group are cannabis and its
active compound, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) (see the section “Cannabis-Related
Disorders”). These substances can have hallucinogenic effects but are diagnosed separately
because of significant differences in their psychological and behavioral effects.
Hallucinogens are usually taken orally, although some forms are smoked (e.g., DMT,
salvia) or (rarely) taken intranasally or by injection (e.g., ecstasy). Duration of effects varies
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder 525
across types of hallucinogens. Some of these substances (i.e., LSD, MDMA) have a long
half-life and extended duration such that users may spend hours to days using and/or re-
covering from the effects of these drugs. However, other hallucinogenic drugs (e.g., DMT,
salvia) are short acting. Tolerance to hallucinogens develops with repeated use and has
been reported to have both autonomic and psychological effects. Cross-tolerance exists be-
tween LSD and other hallucinogens (e.g., psilocybin, mescaline) but does not extend to
other drug categories such as amphetamines and cannabis.
MDMA/ecstasy as a hallucinogen may have distinctive effects attributable to both its hal-
lucinogenic and its stimulant properties. Among heavy ecstasy users, continued use despite
physical or psychological problems, tolerance, hazardous use, and spending a great deal of
time obtaining the substance are the most commonly reported criteria—over 50% in adults
and over 30% in a younger sample, while legal problems related to substance use and persis-
tent desire/inability to quit are rarely reported. As found for other substances, diagnostic cri-
teria for other hallucinogen use disorder are arrayed along a single continuum of severity.
One of the generic criteria for substance use disorders, a clinically significant with-
drawal syndrome, has not been consistently documented in humans, and therefore the di-
agnosis of hallucinogen withdrawal syndrome is not included in DSM-5. However, there
is evidence of withdrawal from MDMA, with endorsement of two or more withdrawal
symptoms observed in 59%–98% in selected samples of ecstasy users. Both psychological
and physical problems have been commonly reported as withdrawal problems.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The characteristic symptom features of some of the hallucinogens can aid in diagnosis if
urine or blood toxicology results are not available. For example, individuals who use LSD
tend to experience visual hallucinations that can be frightening. Individuals intoxicated
with hallucinogens may exhibit a temporary increase in suicidality.
Prevalence
Of all substance use disorders, other hallucinogen use disorder is one of the rarest. The
12-month prevalence is estimated to be 0.5% among 12- to 17-year-olds and 0.1% among
adults age 18 and older in the United States. Rates are higher in adult males (0.2%) compared
with females (0.1%), but the opposite is observed in adolescent samples ages 12–17, in which
the 12-month rate is slightly higher in females (0.6%) than in males (0.4%). Rates are highest in
individuals younger than 30 years, with the peak occurring in individuals ages 18–29 years
(0.6%) and decreasing to virtually 0.0% among individuals age 45 and older.
There are marked ethnic differences in 12-month prevalence of other hallucinogen use
disorder. Among youths ages 12–17 years, 12-month prevalence is higher among Native
Americans and Alaska Natives (1.2%) than among Hispanics (0.6%), whites (0.6%), Afri-
can Americans (0.2%), and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.2%). Among adults,
12-month prevalence of other hallucinogen use disorder is similar for Native Americans
and Alaska Natives, whites, and Hispanics (all 0.2%) but somewhat lower for Asian Amer-
icans and Pacific Islanders (0.07%) and African Americans (0.03%). Past-year prevalence is
higher in clinical samples (e.g., 19% in adolescents in treatment). Among individuals cur-
rently using hallucinogens in the general population, 7.8% (adult) to 17% (adolescent) had
a problematic pattern of use that met criteria for past-year other hallucinogen use disorder.
Among select groups of individuals who use hallucinogens (e.g., recent heavy ecstasy
use), 73.5% of adults and 77% of adolescents have a problematic pattern of use that may
meet other hallucinogen use disorder criteria.
Development and Course
Unlike most substances where an early age at onset is associated with elevations in risk for
the corresponding use disorder, it is unclear whether there is an association of an early age
526 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
at onset with elevations in risk for other hallucinogen use disorder. However, patterns of
drug consumption have been found to differ by age at onset, with early-onset ecstasy users
more likely to be polydrug users than their later-onset counterparts. There may be a dis-
proportionate influence of use of specific hallucinogens on risk of developing other hallu-
cinogen use disorder, with use of ecstasy/MDMA increasing the risk of the disorder
relative to use of other hallucinogens.
Little is known regarding the course of other hallucinogen use disorder, but it is generally
thought to have low incidence, low persistence, and high rates of recovery. Adolescents are es-
pecially at risk for using these drugs, and it is estimated that 2.7% of youths ages 12–17 years
have used one or more of these drugs in the past 12 months, with 44% having used ecstasy/
MDMA. Other hallucinogen use disorder is a disorder observed primarily in individuals
younger than 30 years, with rates vanishingly rare among older adults.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. In adolescents but not consistently in adults, MDMA use is associated with
an elevated rate of other hallucinogen use disorder. Other substance use disorders, particu-
larly alcohol, tobacco, and cannabis, and major depressive disorder are associated with ele-
vated rates of other hallucinogen use disorder. Antisocial personality disorder may be
elevated among individuals who use more than two other drugs in addition to hallucinogens,
compared with their counterparts with less extensive use history. The influence of adult anti-
social behaviors—but not conduct disorder or antisocial personality disorder—on other hal-
lucinogen use disorder may be stronger in females than in males. Use of specific hallucinogens
(e.g., salvia) is prominent among individuals ages 18–25 years with other risk-taking behaviors
and illegal activities. Cannabis use has also been implicated as a precursor to initiation of use of
hallucinogens (e.g., ecstasy), along with early use of alcohol and tobacco. Higher drug use by
peers and high sensation seeking have also been associated with elevated rates of ecstasy use.
MDMA/ecstasy use appears to signify a more severe group of hallucinogen users.
Genetic and physiological. Among male twins, total variance due to additive genetics
has been estimated to range from 26% to 79%, with inconsistent evidence for shared envi-
ronmental influences.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Historically, hallucinogens have been used as part of established religious practices, such
as the use of peyote in the Native American Church and in Mexico. Ritual use by indige-
nous populations of psilocybin obtained from certain types of mushrooms has occurred in
South America, Mexico, and some areas in the United States, or of ayahuasca in the Santo
Daime and União de Vegetal sects. Regular use of peyote as part of religious rituals is not
linked to neuropsychological or psychological deficits. For adults, no race or ethnicity dif-
ferences for the full criteria or for any individual criterion are apparent at this time.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In adolescents, females may be less likely than males to endorse “hazardous use,” and fe-
male gender may be associated with increased odds of other hallucinogen use disorder.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory testing can be useful in distinguishing among the different hallucinogens.
However, because some agents (e.g., LSD) are so potent that as little as 75 micrograms can
produce severe reactions, typical toxicological examination will not always reveal which
substance has been used.
Phencyclidine Intoxication 527
Functional Consequences of
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
There is evidence for long-term neurotoxic effects of MDMA/ecstasy use, including im-
pairments in memory, psychological function, and neuroendocrine function; serotonin
system dysfunction; and sleep disturbance; as well as adverse effects on brain microvas-
culature, white matter maturation, and damage to axons. Use of MDMA/ecstasy may di-
minish functional connectivity among brain regions.
Differential Diagnosis
Other substance use disorders. The effects of hallucinogens must be distinguished from
those of other substances (e.g., amphetamines), especially because contamination of the
hallucinogens with other drugs is relatively common.
Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia also must be ruled out, as some affected individuals (e.g.,
individuals with schizophrenia who exhibit paranoia) may falsely attribute their symp-
toms to use of hallucinogens.
Other mental disorders or medical conditions. Other potential disorders or conditions
to consider include panic disorder, depressive and bipolar disorders, alcohol or sedative
withdrawal, hypoglycemia and other metabolic conditions, seizure disorder, stroke, oph-
thalmological disorder, and central nervous system tumors. Careful history of drug tak-
ing, collateral reports from family and friends (if possible), age, clinical history, physical
examination, and toxicology reports should be useful in arriving at the final diagnostic de-
cision.
Comorbidity
Adolescents who use MDMA/ecstasy and other hallucinogens, as well as adults who have
recently used ecstasy, have a higher prevalence of other substance use disorders compared
with nonhallucinogen substance users. Individuals who use hallucinogens exhibit eleva-
tions of nonsubstance mental disorders (especially anxiety, depressive, and bipolar disor-
ders), particularly with use of ecstasy and salvia. Rates of antisocial personality disorder (but
not conduct disorder) are significantly elevated among individuals with other hallucinogen
use disorder, as are rates of adult antisocial behavior. However, it is unclear whether the
mental illnesses may be precursors to rather than consequences of other hallucinogen use
disorder (see the section “Risk and Prognostic Factors” for this disorder). Both adults and
adolescents who use ecstasy are more likely than other drug users to be polydrug users and
to have other drug use disorders.
Phencyclidine Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of phencyclidine (or a pharmacologically similar substance).
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral changes (e.g., belligerence, assaultive-
ness, impulsiveness, unpredictability, psychomotor agitation, impaired judgment) that
developed during, or shortly after, phencyclidine use.
C. Within 1 hour, two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms:
Note: When the drug is smoked, “snorted,” or used intravenously, the onset may be
particularly rapid.
1. Vertical or horizontal nystagmus.
2. Hypertension or tachycardia.
528 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
3. Numbness or diminished responsiveness to pain.
4. Ataxia.
5. Dysarthria.
6. Muscle rigidity.
7. Seizures or coma.
8. Hyperacusis.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better
explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89. The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid phencyclidine use disorder. If a mild phencyclidine use disorder is co-
morbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.129, and if a moderate or severe phencyclidine use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.229. If there is no comorbid phencycli-
dine use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F16.929.
Note: In addition to the section “Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine Intoxication,”
see the corresponding section in phencyclidine use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Phencyclidine intoxication reflects the clinically significant behavioral changes that occur
shortly after ingestion of this substance (or a pharmacologically similar substance). The
most common clinical presentations of phencyclidine intoxication include disorientation,
confusion without hallucinations, hallucinations or delusions, a catatonic-like syndrome,
and coma of varying severity. The intoxication typically lasts for several hours but, de-
pending on the type of clinical presentation and whether other drugs besides phencycli-
dine were consumed, may last for several days or longer.
Prevalence
Use of phencyclidine or related substances may be taken as an estimate of the prevalence
of intoxication. Approximately 2.5% of the population reports having ever used phency-
clidine. Among high school students, 2.3% of 12th graders report ever using phencycli-
dine, with 57% having used in the past 12 months. This represents an increase from prior
to 2011. Past-year use of ketamine, which is assessed separately from other substances, has
remained stable over time, with about 1.7% of 12th graders reporting use.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory testing may be useful, as phencyclidine is detectable in urine for up to 8 days
following use, although the levels are only weakly associated with an individual’s clinical
presentation and may therefore not be useful for case management. Creatine phosphoki-
nase and aspartate aminotransferase levels may be elevated.
Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine Intoxication
Phencyclidine intoxication produces extensive cardiovascular and neurological (e.g., sei-
zures, dystonias, dyskinesias, catalepsy, hypothermia or hyperthermia) toxicity.
Differential Diagnosis
In particular, in the absence of intact reality testing (i.e., without insight into any percep-
tual abnormalities), an additional diagnosis of phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder
should be considered.
Other substance intoxication. Phencyclidine intoxication should be differentiated from
intoxication due to other substances, including other hallucinogens; amphetamine, co-
Other Hallucinogen Intoxication 529
caine, or other stimulants; and anticholinergics, as well as withdrawal from benzodiaze-
pines. Nystagmus and bizarre and violent behavior may distinguish intoxication due to
phencyclidine from that due to other substances. Toxicological tests may be useful in mak-
ing this distinction, since phencyclidine is detectable in urine for up to 8 days after use.
However, there is a weak correlation between quantitative toxicology levels of phencycli-
dine and clinical presentation that diminishes the utility of the laboratory findings for pa-
tient management.
Other conditions. Other conditions to be considered include schizophrenia, depression,
withdrawal from other drugs (e.g., sedatives, alcohol), certain metabolic disorders like hy-
poglycemia and hyponatremia, central nervous system tumors, seizure disorders, sepsis,
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and vascular insults.
Other Hallucinogen Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of a hallucinogen (other than phencyclidine).
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., marked
anxiety or depression, ideas of reference, fear of “losing one’s mind,” paranoid ide-
ation, impaired judgment) that developed during, or shortly after, hallucinogen use.
C. Perceptual changes occurring in a state of full wakefulness and alertness (e.g., sub-
jective intensification of perceptions, depersonalization, derealization, illusions, hallu-
cinations, synesthesias) that developed during, or shortly after, hallucinogen use.
D. Two (or more) of the following signs developing during, or shortly after, hallucinogen
use:
1. Pupillary dilation.
2. Tachycardia.
3. Sweating.
4. Palpitations.
5. Blurring of vision.
6. Tremors.
7. Incoordination.
E. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another sub-
stance.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89. The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid hallucinogen use disorder. If a mild hallucinogen use disorder is co-
morbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.129, and if a moderate or severe hallucinogen use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.229. If there is no comorbid hallucinogen
use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F16.929.
Note: For information on Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis and Culture-Related
Diagnostic Issues, see the corresponding sections in other hallucinogen use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Other hallucinogen intoxication reflects the clinically significant behaviora